Title: Farro with Confetti Vegetables

Diced “confetti” vegetables are slow-roasted and mixed with whole-grain farro in this delicious side dish. Adaptable for summer or winter produce and herbs, this colorful recipe is fit for all seasons.
Farro with Confetti Vegetables
1 cup farro, uncooked
Seasonal vegetables, diced (4 vegetables make about 8-10 cups)
 
 (Summer: zucchini, summer squash, bell pepper, eggplant) 
 (Winter: root vegetables: carrots, parsnips, beets; and winter squashes: butternut, acorn)
(Summer: zucchini, summer squash, bell pepper, eggplant)
(Winter: root vegetables: carrots, parsnips, beets; and winter squashes: butternut, acorn)
¼ cup canola, olive, or other healthy oil
¾ Tbsp. pepper
2 cups low-sodium vegetable stock
A pinch of salt
1 Tbsp. lemon juice
Fresh herbs as available, chopped
Preheat oven to 450 degrees Fahrenheit.
Dice all vegetables into even pieces and set aside.
Bring vegetable stock to a boil in a medium saucepan, then stir in the farro. Reduce heat to low, cover, and simmer until the farro is tender (Approximately 40 minutes. Check package for cooking instructions).
Meanwhile, toss the diced vegetables in canola oil, sprinkle with salt and pepper, and place on a baking pan, and roast until browned in the preheated oven for 20 to 30 minutes. Check every 10 minutes, and toss the vegetables so that they brown evenly.
Once the vegetables are fully roasted, fold them into the farro. Add the lemon juice and taste to adjust for seasoning. Add additional salt, pepper, and fresh herbs, to taste.
Nutrition information per serving (1/8 of recipe):
Using summer vegetables and canola oil:
181 calories, 8 g protein, 25 g carbohydrate, 5 g fiber, 4 g sugar**, 0 g added sugar, 52 mg sodium, 365 mg potassium, 8 g fat (1 g sat, 4 g mono, 3 g poly, 0 g trans), 0 g cholesterol
Using winter vegetables and canola oil:
225 calories, 6 g protein, 36 g carbohydrate, 6 g fiber, 7 g sugar (0 g added sugar), 128 mg sodium, 298 mg potassium, 7 g fat (0 g sat, 4 g mono, 3 g poly, 0 g trans), 0 mg cholesterol
Adapted from recipe by Harvard University Dining Services.
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.

References:

