Title: Swap out red meat for healthier meats

People have varying perceptions of what they consider to be “meat.” Although technically defined as any animal flesh consumed for food, some may only think of red and processed animal products as “meats,” while poultry and fish are viewed as separate categories. This may be a helpful approach, since the variety of meats and other animal products can have  different effects on our own health , and the  health of the planet .
Start here:
While a key goal should be getting more veggies and other quality plant-based foods in your diet, this step towards reducing red meat is pretty straightforward: incorporate a reasonable amount of poultry (like chicken and turkey) and a variety of seafood (from fish to mollusks).
If you were planning to make a dish with red meat in a “starring role,” consider poultry and fish in its place. Finding some new favorite recipes is a great start; but here are some simple swaps that will come in handy for a range of recipes:
 
 Marinate and pan-fry chicken or fish instead of grilling burgers and ribs 
 Swap in ground turkey for ground beef 
 Think sliced fresh chicken or canned tuna over cold cuts of any kind 
 Bake/sauté a chicken breast or some white fish, instead of frying a steak 
 Roast a turkey, chicken, or salmon rather than beef, lamb, or ham
Marinate and pan-fry chicken or fish instead of grilling burgers and ribs
Swap in ground turkey for ground beef
Think sliced fresh chicken or canned tuna over cold cuts of any kind
Bake/sauté a chicken breast or some white fish, instead of frying a steak
Roast a turkey, chicken, or salmon rather than beef, lamb, or ham
Take it a step further:
This strategy comes in handy when you’re designing a meal around animal-based protein, but what about giving plant-based foods some more of the spotlight? This next strategy boosts healthy plant-based foods like beans, nuts, whole grains, and other veggies, while still providing enough protein and ways to incorporate some of your favorite animal-based foods:
Consume less meat, enjoy more variety
More plate upgrades:
Prioritize hearty and savory plant-based preparations
Eat a little less red meat, any way you can
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.

References:
https://nutritionsource.hsph.harvard.edu/what-should-you-eat/protein/#protein-research
https://nutritionsource.hsph.harvard.edu/sustainability/plate-and-planet/
https://nutritionsource.hsph.harvard.edu/elevate-your-plate/hearty-and-savory-plant-based/
https://nutritionsource.hsph.harvard.edu/elevate-your-plate/a-little-less-red-meat/
