Title: Cauliflower Tomato Soup with Indian Spices

This soup gets its thick, silky, almost creamy consistency from pureed cauliflower instead of cream, and it gets its intense flavor from a variety of traditional Indian spices. It is good served either warm or cold. You can garnish with cilantro leaves and a dollop of plain yogurt to add vibrant color and even more fantastic flavor.  Serve with your favorite sandwich and some fresh fruit. The soup can be stored in the refrigerator for up to five days. It can also be frozen and reheated.
Cauliflower Tomato Soup with Indian Spices
2 tablespoons canola oil
1 teaspoon coriander seeds
1 teaspoon mustard seeds
1 teaspoon ground turmeric
½ teaspoon cumin seeds
½ teaspoon red pepper flakes
½ teaspoon ground coriander
1 medium white or yellow onion, chopped
1 28-ounce can crushed tomatoes
1 pound fresh or frozen cauliflower, cut into florets
4 cups water
¼ teaspoon kosher salt
½ teaspoon freshly ground black pepper
½ cup plain, low-fat yogurt, for garnish
½ cup cilantro leaves, for garnish
In a 4-quart stock pot combine the canola oil, coriander seeds, mustard seeds, turmeric, cumin seeds, red pepper flakes, and ground coriander. Turn heat to medium and gently warm the spices until you can hear the mustard seeds begin to pop and you begin to smell the heady aroma of the other spices.
Add the onions, reduce the heat to medium-low and cook until the onions are soft, about 5 to 6 minutes.
Add the crushed tomatoes, cauliflower, and water. Increase the heat to high, bring to a boil, and then reduce heat to low, cover, and cook until the cauliflower is soft, about 20 to 25 minutes.
Remove from heat and use an immersion blender to create a smooth, “creamy” soup. Season with kosher salt and black pepper.
Garnish, if desired, with cilantro and yogurt, and serve.
Nutrition facts:
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.

References:

