Title: Fantastic Bulgur Dish

Be sure to use a heavy nonstick pan. Plain kitchen scissors are the best utensil for cutting dried tomatoes. Tiny yellow cherry tomatoes look and work best in this dish. If you can only get larger ones, cut them in half. If you can only get red ones, that will be okay, too. Chopped Roma tomatoes will work as well.
Fantastic Bulgur Dish
1 tablespoon extra-virgin olive oil
2 cups tiny cherry tomatoes (½ pound)—yellow ones, if available, or diced Roma tomatoes
½ cup dried tomatoes, minced (1 ounce)
1 tablespoon minced garlic
¾ teaspoon salt
1½ cups coarse bulgur
2 cups water (room temperature or warmer)
¼ teaspoon red pepper flakes to taste
1 to 2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice to taste
2 to 3 teaspoons light-colored honey to taste
Freshly ground black pepper
1 cup chopped walnuts, lightly toasted
Roasted walnut oil
Wedges of lemon
Heat 1 tablespoon olive oil in a large, deep nonstick skillet. Add the cherry tomatoes and sauté over high heat for about 5 minutes.
Stir in the dried tomatoes and the salt. Continue cooking over high heat for about 2 to 3 minutes longer (cherry tomatoes might begin to pop open from the heat, and that’s fine).
Turn the heat down. Add the garlic and bulgur (and a little more oil, if it seems dry), and sauté over medium-low heat for about 2 minutes. Stir in the water, bring to a boil, then turn the heat down as low as possible. Cover and simmer for 35 minutes or until the bulgur is tender.
Transfer to a serving bowl, and fluff with a fork to let the steam escape so that the bulgur won’t become mushy. Taste to adjust salt, then add red pepper flakes, lemon juice, honey, and black pepper to taste.
Serve hot or warm, topped with walnuts and a drizzle of roasted walnut oil, and garnish with lemon wedges.
Nutrition facts:
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.

References:

