Title: Shrimp and Chicken Gumbo

Serve this Cajun specialty over brown rice.
Shrimp and Chicken Gumbo
2 cups chopped okra
4 tablespoons sesame oil
1 large onion, chopped
2 stalks celery, chopped
½ sweet green pepper, chopped
½ bunch parsley (with stems), chopped (1 cup)
8 to 10 scallions, chopped
4 cloves garlic, crushed and minced
1 cup roux (see recipe below)
2 quarts water
1 4-pound chicken, cut up
¼ teaspoon cayenne pepper
4 bay leaves
½ teaspoon dried thyme
¾ pound shelled shrimp
Roux 
 
 1 cup sesame oil 
 2 to 2¼ cups whole wheat pastry flour
Roux
1 cup sesame oil
2 to 2¼ cups whole wheat pastry flour
Sauté the okra in 2 tablespoons oil until the soft and ropy texture is gone, 10 to 15 minutes. Set it aside.
In a large saucepan heat the remaining oil and sauté the onions, celery, sweet green pepper, parsley, scallions, and garlic until wilted and softened, about 7 minutes.
Add the roux and water. Bring the mixture to a boil, stirring constantly, then add the okra, chicken, cayenne, bay leaves, and thyme. Lower the heat and simmer the mixture for at least 1 hour. Fifteen minutes before serving, add the shrimp. Remove the bay leaves and serve the gumbo over brown rice.
Roux  (Makes 2¾ cups)
Stir the oil and flour together in a large, heavy saucepan. Cook over very low heat, stirring constantly, for 25 minutes. The roux will turn a dark golden brown and have the consistency of heavy cream.
Cool the roux and store in a tightly covered jar in the refrigerator, where it will keep in good condition for several months.
Nutrition facts:
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.

References:

