Title: Spicy Broccolini with Red Pepper

Most supermarkets offer broccolini, which looks similar to rapini, but the flavor is less bitter. You can steam, boil, or stir-fry broccoli or rapini. Nina likes to blanch these types of vegetables in advance until near-tender, refresh them, and then stir-fry over very high heat just before serving.
Spicy Broccolini with Red Pepper
2 pounds broccolini, rapini, Chinese or western broccoli or flowering rape
2 tablespoons virgin olive oil
1 teaspoon crushed dried chili flakes
1 small red bell pepper, cored, seeded, and cut into ¼-inch dice
6 cloves garlic, smashed with the flat edge of a knife, skins removed, and sliced thinly
1 teaspoon salt to taste
Juice of ½ lemon, or about 2½ tablespoons
Cut away the tough end of the broccolini or rapini, and peel away the tough outer skin from the stems. Separate the stalks or tougher part of the vegetable from the more tender part (flowerets). Cut the stalks into 1-inch lengths and separate the flowerets.
Bring 3 quarts water to a boil, add the tougher part (stalks) of the vegetable and cook for about 2 minutes or until almost tender, but al dente. Add the remaining part of the vegetable and cook for another minute, or until the vegetable is tender. Drain and refresh briefly in cold water. Drain again.
Heat a wok or a heavy skillet, add the oil, and heat until hot, about 15 seconds. Add the chili flakes, red pepper, and sliced garlic. Stir-fry over medium-high heat for 2 minutes or until the red pepper is slightly tender.
Add the broccolini and toss lightly over high heat to mix for a minute. Add the lemon juice and salt and toss lightly to mix. Stir together and taste for seasoning, adjusting if necessary. Scoop onto a platter or into a bowl and serve. Serve hot, at room temperature, or cold.
Nutrition facts:
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.

References:

