Title: Frequently Asked Questions

“I would like to edit the  Healthy Eating Plate  or  Healthy Eating Pyramid  text to better suit my population. OR – I would like to translate the text of the  Healthy Eating Plate  or  Healthy Eating Pyramid  into a  different language .”
Harvard owns the rights of the Healthy Eating Plate and Healthy Eating Pyramid. You cannot modify or translate the text in any way. If you would like to request permission to use an unmodified version of the Healthy Eating Plate or the Healthy Eating Pyramid, please submit this  form . With the information from these forms, we can process your request.
“I recently heard that  dairy/eggs/fish/saturated fat/brown rice  is  less/more  healthy than your website suggests. I am so confused by the contradicting research, and I would love to know what I should really be eating! Should I include this food in my diet?”
“I was recently diagnosed with  diabetes/heart disease/celiac disease/lactose intolerance,  and I noticed that your website does not have special dietary information for my disease. Can you please advise me about how to eat a healthy diet with my disease?”
Thank you very much for your interest in The Nutrition Source. We appreciate your concerns about your diet, and we aim to update the website with diet information for the general public as frequently as possible. However, we are unable to provide personal nutrition advice. If you would like to contact a licensed nutrition professional to obtain such advice, the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics lists registered dietitians on its  website .
“I just read an article that stated that  a particular food item  is extremely unhealthy or healthy. Your website does not discuss this! What do you think?”
Unfortunately, our website currently does not have any articles or information on the topic you have raised, but we will keep your interest in mind as we consider topic updates in the future.
“I am emailing to link you to my new  book/website/blog/product/weight loss supplement, or food item . We would love to form a partnership with you and would appreciate a link to our product added to your website.”
Thank you very much for your interest in The Nutrition Source. We do not form partnerships with or endorse any brands because we do not have corporate sponsors, so we would be unable to offer that on our website. As you can see in our terms of use: “The information does not mention brand names, nor does it endorse any particular products.” Best of luck with your venture.


Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.

References:

https://harvard.qualtrics.com/SE/?SID=SV_0PselmqePDx3obP
http://www.eatright.org
