Title: Braised Oyster Mushrooms, Coconut, and Macadamia

For many people,  mushrooms  are prized for their ‘meatiness’. That chewy, toothsome quality makes mushrooms a great staple for  those following plant-based diets . Mushrooms owe their meatiness to  chitin —a polysaccharide and derivative of glucose—which makes up the cell walls of most fungi. Chitin is fibrous, absorbs water well, and is tough to break down. In fact, because of that toughness, it’s pretty hard to overcook mushrooms. They retain their texture even after hours of simmering. Here we pair briny, meaty oyster mushrooms with coconut for a warming dish you can whip up any night of the week. After searing the mushrooms, we simmer them in a mixture of coconut milk, garlic, and ginger. The mushrooms absorb the liquid and plump up, while retaining their meaty texture. We like these mushrooms over  wild or black rice , with plenty of toasted  macadamia nuts  for crunch. But feel free to eat them over noodles,  sweet potatoes , or just straight out of the pot.
Braised Oyster Mushrooms, Coconut, and Macadamia
1 13.5-ounce can light coconut milk
1 teaspoon cornstarch
2 tablespoons vegetable oil
8 ounces oyster mushrooms, torn into 2-inch pieces
1 clove garlic, grated
½-inch piece of ginger, grated
1/4 teaspoon fish sauce (optional)
1 cup black rice or wild rice
1/2 cup toasted macadamia nuts, chopped
Extra-virgin olive oil, for serving
Whisk coconut milk and cornstarch in medium bowl until combined and set aside. Heat oil in 12-inch skillet over medium-high heat until shimmering. Add mushrooms and 1/2 teaspoon salt and cook, turning once, until golden brown on most sides, about 5 to 7 minutes. Stir in garlic and ginger and cook until fragrant, about 30 seconds. Stir in coconut milk mixture and bring to boil. Reduce heat to low and simmer until mushrooms are tender and plump, 8 to 10 minutes longer. Season with fish sauce if desired and salt to taste. Set aside until ready to serve.
Meanwhile, bring 2 cups water to boil in medium saucepan. Stir in rice, 1/4 teaspoon salt, bring to simmer, reduce heat to low, cover and cook until rice has absorbed water, 20 to 25 minutes. Fluff rice with fork, cover and set aside.
To serve, divide rice between two bowls. Spoon mushrooms over rice and pour coconut sauce on top. Sprinkle with macadamia nuts and serve.
Nutrition facts:
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.

References:
https://nutritionsource.hsph.harvard.edu/food-features/mushrooms/
https://nutritionsource.hsph.harvard.edu/elevate-your-plate/hearty-and-savory-plant-based/
https://nutritionsource.hsph.harvard.edu/food-features/rice/
https://nutritionsource.hsph.harvard.edu/nuts-for-the-heart/
https://nutritionsource.hsph.harvard.edu/food-features/sweet-potatoes/
