Title: Savor: Mindful Eating, Mindful Life

In  Savor  (HarperCollins), renowned spiritual leader Thich Nhat Hanh and Harvard nutritionist Dr. Lilian Cheung combine timeless Buddhist wisdom with nutrition science to deliver a new and insightful perspective on how people can end their struggles with weight for good.

Science tells us that to lose weight, people must eat less and exercise more. But somehow people get stalled. They often start on weight-loss programs with good intentions but cannot stay on track. They may find that they are caught in a cycle of shame and guilt, spending countless hours worrying about their food and activity choices, blaming themselves for actions that they can’t undo. Hanh and Cheung explain that when people are stuck in the past, they are unable to live in the present—that moment in which people do truly have the power to make changes in their lives. It is the awareness of the present moment, the realization of why we do what we do, that enables us to stop feeling bad and start changing our behavior.
Offering practical tools, including personalized goal setting, a detailed nutrition guide grounded in the latest science, and a mindful living plan,  Savor  helps readers uncover the roots of ingrained habits and then guides them to transform their actions.  Savor  teaches how to easily adopt the practice of mindfulness and integrate it into eating, exercise, and all facets of daily life.The book’s goal is to not only help readers achieve healthy weight and well-being, but also to bring to the surface the rich abundance of life available in every moment.
Thich Nhat Hanh is one of the best-known and most-respected Zen masters in the world today, a poet, and a peace and human rights activist. Lilian Cheung, D.Sc., R.D., is a lecturer and Director of Health Promotion and Communication in the Dept. of Nutrition at Harvard School of Public Health, and editorial director of The Nutrition Source. More information on  Savor  is available at  SavorTheBook.com .
Table of Contents
Part 1: A Buddhist Perspective on Weight Control
Chatper 1: Ending Your Struggle with Weight
Chapter 2: Are You Really Appreciating the Apple? An Apple Meditation
Chapter 3: You Are  More  Than What You Eat
Chapter 4: Stop and Look: The Present Moment
Part 2: Mindful Action Plans
Chapter 5: Mindful Eating
Chapter 6: Mindful Moving
Chapter 7: Mindful Living Plan
Part 3: Individual and Collective Effort
Chapter 8: A Mindful World

References:
https://nutritionsource.hsph.harvard.edu/wp-content/uploads/2012/10/savor.final_.jpg
http://www.savorthebook.com
http://www.savorthebook.com
