Title: Shrimp with Red Curry and Crispy Sprouted Lentils

While sprouted  lentils  are certainly enjoyable eaten raw ( see the recipe to make them at home ), they transform into something equally delicious when cooked. Crisping them in a pan creates crunchy, toasty morsels that are something between popcorn, toasted nuts, and potato chips. Here we pair these crispy lentils with a simple but intense dish of poached shrimp in red curry. A splash of coconut milk rounds out the dish and gives body, and we serve the shrimp with plenty of fresh cilantro. Serve this dish with brown rice and plenty of limes for a light but satisfying dinner.
Shrimp with Red Curry and Crispy Sprouted Lentils
3 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil
1 cup  sprouted lentils
⅛ teaspoon salt, plus more to taste
½ cup coconut milk
1 tablespoon cornstarch
4 cloves garlic, grated
1 2-inch piece ginger, grated
¼ cup (2 ounces) red curry paste
⅓ cup vegetable broth
1 ½ pounds fresh, shell-on jumbo shrimp (16 to 20 per pound), peeled, deveined, and tails removed
12 fresh cilantro sprigs, trimmed and cut into 2-inch pieces
Heat 2 tablespoons oil in large saucepan over medium-high heat until shimmering. Add lentils and cook, stirring occasionally, until lightly browned, about 3 minutes. Drain lentils on paper towel-lined plate. Season lentils with salt to taste and set aside.
Whisk coconut milk and cornstarch in small bowl until smooth and combined and set aside. Heat remaining 1 tablespoon oil in now-empty pot over medium heat until shimmering. Add garlic, ginger, and curry paste, and 1/8 teaspoon salt and cook, stirring occasionally, until mixture is dry and sticks to bottom of pot, 4 to 5 minutes. Add broth and cook, stirring and scraping bottom of pot with wooden spoon, until mixture is combined and bubbling, about 30 seconds. Whisk in coconut milk mixture and cook, stirring occasionally, until mixture is thickened, combined, and bubbling, 1 to 2 minutes longer. Season sauce with salt to taste.
Reduce heat to low, add shrimp, cover, and cook, flipping shrimp halfway through cooking, until shrimp are just opaque, 4 to 6 minutes. Transfer shrimp to serving platter and pour sauce over shrimp. Sprinkle lentils and cilantro over shrimp,  and serve.
Nutrition facts:
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.

References:
https://nutritionsource.hsph.harvard.edu/food-features/lentils/
https://nutritionsource.hsph.harvard.edu/sprouted-lentils/
https://nutritionsource.hsph.harvard.edu/sprouted-lentils/
