Title: Curried Red Lentil Soup

Red lentils are a versatile member of the  lentil family . Along with yellow and white lentil varieties, red lentils are sold  decorticated  (with their skins removed), so they cook much quicker than do their black, brown, or green counterparts. In fact, red lentils easily cook down to mush if you’re not careful, but that’s a great quality to have when making soups or Indian-style  daal . Here we have a hearty soup with some of those Indian influences—just shy of a more authentic  masoor dal— using a few key pantry items. Blooming spices and tomato paste in an onion mixture creates layers of toasty flavor. And because these lentils cook and soften so quickly, there’s no need for a blender or any special equipment. Instead, we simply use a whisk to lightly pulse the mixture, resulting in a soup with a pleasant, rustic texture. A splash of lemon juice gives brightness to the dish. Add a little  naan  or toasted bread, and salad, and you’ve got a quick, simple soup makes the perfect light dinner.
Curried Red Lentil Soup
2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil, plus extra for serving
1 large onion, chopped fine
Pinch salt
2 teaspoons curry powder
½ teaspoon ground cumin
¼ teaspoon pepper
Pinch cayenne
1 tablespoon tomato paste
1 garlic clove, minced
4 cups chicken broth
2 cups water
10 ½ ounces (1 ½ cups) red lentils, picked over and rinsed
2 tablespoons lemon juice, plus extra wedges for serving
Chopped fresh cilantro
Heat oil in large saucepan over medium heat. Add onion and 1 teaspoon salt and cook, stirring occasionally, until softened, about 5 minutes. Add curry powder, cumin, pepper, and cayenne, and cook until fragrant, about 2 minutes. Stir in tomato paste and garlic and cook for 1 minute. Stir in broth, water, and lentils and bring to simmer. Simmer, stirring occasionally, until lentils are soft and about half are broken down, about 15 minutes.
Whisk soup vigorously until it is coarsely pureed, about 30 seconds. Stir in lemon juice and season with salt to taste. Ladle soup into individual bowls, drizzle each portion with olive oil, sprinkle with cilantro, and serve with extra lemon juice. (Soup can be refrigerated for up to 3 days. Thin soup with water, if desired, when reheating.)
Nutrition facts:
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.

References:
https://nutritionsource.hsph.harvard.edu/food-features/lentils/
