Title: Whole Wheat Banana Nut Muffins

These are 100 percent whole wheat muffins. The yogurt helps develop the delicate texture and the toasted walnuts combined with the walnut oil provide an appealing flavor and texture. If you don’t have walnut oil, just use all canola oil. You can enjoy these muffins warm or cool, but the  banana  flavor intensifies when the muffins cool to room temperature.

Related
The Great Muffin Makeover
Blueberry Muffin Battle
Whole Wheat Banana Nut Muffins
1½ cups (160 g) walnuts, toasted and chopped
5 Tbsp. (70 g) canola oil
1 Tbsp. (14 g) walnut oil
¼     cup (40 g) brown sugar
1 egg
½ tsp.    (4 g) vanilla extract
½ cup (121    g) non-fat plain Greek yogurt
5 (380 g) ripe bananas, mashed
1½ cups (153 g) whole wheat pastry flour
1½ tsp. (7 g) baking powder
½ tsp. (2 g) salt
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees Fahrenheit. Line the muffin tins with paper liners.
When the oven reaches temperature, place walnuts on a baking sheet and toast in the oven for 5 minutes. Remove from oven and chop.
In a medium mixing bowl, combine the canola oil, walnut oil, brown sugar, egg, vanilla, and yogurt. Whisk to combine, and then stir in the mashed banana and the toasted, chopped walnuts.
Stir in the flour, baking powder, and salt.
Use a ¼ cup measuring cup to portion out the batter into the 18 lined muffin cups.
Bake for 23 to 25 minutes, or until the tops of the muffins are nicely browned.
Cool on a wire rack
Nutrition information per serving (1 muffin, or 1/18 of recipe):
180 calories, 3 g protein, 18 g carbohydrate, 2 g fiber, 7 g sugar (2 g added sugar), 85 mg sodium, 165 mg potassium, 10.5 g fat (1 g sat, 3.5 g mono, 6 g poly, 0 g trans), 10 mg cholesterol
Recipe courtesy of The Culinary Institute of America
Related
The Great Muffin Makeover
Blueberry Muffin Battle
Harvard Chan Cooks: recipe videos
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.

References:
https://nutritionsource.hsph.harvard.edu/food-features/bananas/
https://nutritionsource.hsph.harvard.edu/muffin-makeover/
https://nutritionsource.hsph.harvard.edu/blueberry-muffin-battle/
https://nutritionsource.hsph.harvard.edu/muffin-makeover/
https://nutritionsource.hsph.harvard.edu/blueberry-muffin-battle/
https://nutritionsource.hsph.harvard.edu/healthy-recipes-cooking/
