Title: Sprouted Lentil, Cabbage, and Celery Slaw

Here’s an easy, crunch-filled salad that highlights the crisp texture and grassy flavor of sprouted lentils ( see the recipe to make them at home ). To keep the salad crisp and refreshing, we salt cabbage for an hour to drain off extra moisture that would otherwise water down the dish. For an intense, savory but bright dressing, we pair toasted sesame oil and fresh lime juice. A dash of fish sauce brings a subtle funk and richness. We even add sliced celery, doubling down on the crunch factor. This slaw is perfect paired with a piece of fish or chicken, or enjoyed on its own for a light lunch.
Sprouted Lentil, Cabbage, and Celery Slaw
1 small head green cabbage, cored and chopped fine
2 teaspoons salt
1 cup  sprouted lentils
2 ribs celery, sliced thin
2 scallions, sliced thin
½ cup chopped fresh cilantro
3 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil
3 tablespoons toasted sesame oil
¼ cup lime juice (about 2 limes)
1 tablespoon fish sauce
1 tablespoon toasted sesame seeds, plus extra for serving
½ teaspoon ground cumin
Toss cabbage and salt in colander set over medium bowl. Let stand until wilted, about 45 minutes. Rinse cabbage under cold water, drain, dry well with paper towels, and transfer to large bowl. Add sprouted lentils, celery, scallions, and cilantro to bowl.
Whisk olive oil, sesame oil, lime juice, fish sauce, sesame seeds, and cumin in small bowl until smooth and combined, about 30 seconds. Pour dressing over cabbage mixture and toss to coat. Divide slaw into bowls and garnish with extra sesame seeds. Serve.
Nutrition facts:
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.

References:
https://nutritionsource.hsph.harvard.edu/sprouted-lentils/
https://nutritionsource.hsph.harvard.edu/sprouted-lentils/
