Title: Mushroom Tofu Veggie Burger

This is a healthy and very tasty vegetable “burger.” The toasting of the oats and nuts add both flavor and texture dimensions to the final dish.
Mushroom Tofu Veggie Burger
½ cup rolled oats (not instant)
¼ cup almonds, coarsely chopped
1 tablespoon olive or canola oil
½ cup green onions, chopped, including green tops
2 teaspoons minced garlic
1½ cups crimini, shiitake, or other mushrooms, chopped
½ cooked brown basmati rice
1/3 cup white cheddar cheese, grated
2/3 cup firm tofu, mashed
1 large egg plus 1 egg white, lightly beaten
3 tablespoons parsley, chopped
½ cup dry bread crumbs, panko preferred
1 teaspoon salt
¼ teaspoon ground black pepper
Garnish 
 
 6 slices fresh mozzarella (optional) 
 Fresh salsa
Garnish
6 slices fresh mozzarella (optional)
Fresh salsa
Place the oats and almonds on separate baking sheets and lightly toast in a preheated 375 degrees Fahrenheit oven for 5 to 8 minutes or until very lightly colored. Set aside to cool.
Heat oil in a sauté pan and over moderate heat sauté the onions, garlic, and mushrooms until softened and lightly colored. Add the oats and continue to cook for another 2 minutes, stirring constantly. Remove from heat and cool mixture.
Combine the onion mixture with the rice, cheese, tofu, eggs, parsley, breadcrumbs, and almonds and stir to combine. Season to taste with salt and pepper. Shape into 6 patties and sauté or broil until golden and crisp on the outside.
Top with a slice of fresh mozzarella, if desired, and a teaspoon or two of fresh salsa and serve immediately.
Nutrition facts:
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.

References:

