Title: Strawberry Rhubarb Crisp

Of all the foods we eat, fruit contributes the least amount of sodium to the average American’s diet, yet most Americans fall short of the goal of eating three or more servings of fruit a day. One strategy for incorporating more fruit into your diet is to eat fruit for dessert, or to create desserts that are mostly fruit. This dessert is an example of this strategy. Each serving of this dessert provides a full serving of fruit. The addition of whole grains, nuts, and olive oil make this a very satisfying dessert your family and guests will enjoy.
Strawberry Rhubarb Crisp
6 cups fresh or frozen rhubarb (about 1 ½ pounds), cut into ½-inch pieces
3 cups fresh strawberries, quartered
¼ cup light brown sugar
2 teaspoons finely grated lemon or orange peel
1 cup old-fashioned oatmeal
½ cup almond flour or finely ground almonds
½ cup brown sugar
1/3 cup whole wheat flour
6 tablespoons unsalted butter, melted
3 tablespoons extra virgin olive oil
In a large mixing bowl combine the rhubarb, strawberries, brown sugar, and lemon or orange zest. Toss well so all of the fruit is covered in sugar.
Spread the fruit into an even layer on the bottom of a 9-inch by 13-inch ceramic or glass baking dish.
In a medium mixing bowl combine oatmeal, almond flour, brown sugar, whole wheat flour, melted butter, and olive oil. The mixture should be crumbly. Use a large spoon to sprinkle this mixture over the fruit.
Bake at 350 degrees Fahrenheit for 35 to 40 minutes, until the topping is browned and the fruit is soft. Serve warm with a small scoop of vanilla yogurt or ice cream.
Nutrition facts:
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.

References:

