Title: Eat Well & Keep Moving, 3rd Edition

Eat Well & Keep Moving, Third Edition  (Human Kinetics), by Dr. Lilian Cheung, Hank Dart, Sari Kalin, Brett Otis, and Dr. Steven Gortmaker, is a school-based program that equips children with the knowledge, skills, and supportive environment they need to lead more healthful lives by choosing nutritious diets and being physically active.
Designed for fourth- and fifth-grade students, its six interlinked components—classroom education, physical education, school-wide promotional campaigns, food services, staff wellness, and parent and community involvement—work together to create a supportive environment that promotes the learning of lifelong good habits.
This award-winning, evidence-based program has been implemented in all 50 states and in more than 20 countries. The program began as a joint research project between the Harvard School of Public Health (presently the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health) and Baltimore Public Schools. In extensive field tests among students and teachers using the program, children ate more fruits and vegetables, reduced their intake of saturated fat, watched less TV, and improved their knowledge of nutrition and physical activity.
This new third edition provides educators with the following:
Thoroughly updated nutrition and activity guidelines to keep current with the latest and best information available
48 multidisciplinary lessons that supply students with the knowledge and skills they need for choosing healthy eating and activity behaviors
Lessons that address a range of learning outcomes and that can be integrated across multiple subject areas, such as math, language arts, social studies, and visual arts
A new  Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate , created by nutrition experts at the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public health, that offers children clear guidance in making healthy choices and complements the USDA’s MyPlate
Eight “Principles of Healthy Living” messages, including new core messages on water consumption and on sleep (along with two new related lessons)


Visit  eatwellandkeepmoving.org  to sample lessons, download tools for food service and family involvement, and learn more about  Eat Well & Keep Moving’s  integrative, evidence-based approach.

References:
http://www.eatwellandkeepmoving.org
https://nutritionsource.hsph.harvard.edu/kids-healthy-eating-plate/
https://nutritionsource.hsph.harvard.edu/kids-healthy-eating-plate
http://www.eatwellandkeepmoving.org/