Title: Pan Roasted Wild Mushrooms with Coffee and Hazelnuts

One of the best parts about autumn is the appearance of wild  mushrooms . A sudden dip in temperature coupled with excess moisture is enough to coax these fungi out of hiding. Hen of the woods, porcinis, chicken of the woods, oyster mushrooms, and chanterelles are just a small sampling of the varieties available—free of charge—to the discerning woodland forager. But even if you aren’t trained to mushroom-hunt on your own, wild mushrooms tend to pop up in markets when cooler weather approaches.
Here is a simple recipe that highlights the natural nutty, earthy qualities of wild mushrooms. Pan-roasting results in crispy edges but tender, juicy interiors. To complement the earthy and savory notes of these mushrooms, we make a quick sauce of  coffee  and soy sauce. The bitterness of the coffee brings out the bitterness of the mushrooms, so that the mushrooms taste even more…well,  mushroom-y . To provide some textural contrast and sweet, buttery notes, we add in toasted hazelnuts, plus a nice dusting of grated hazelnuts for that fancy, restaurant-quality vibe. For best results, look for varieties such as hen of the woods, chicken of the woods, oyster mushrooms, or butter oyster mushrooms. For the sauce, a light to medium roast coffee works best; dark roasts tend to be too bitter for this application.
Pan Roasted Wild Mushrooms with Coffee and Hazelnuts
1/4 cup brewed coffee
1 1/2 teaspoons soy sauce
1 teaspoon honey
3/4 teaspoon cornstarch
3 tablespoons vegetable oil
10 ounces wild mushrooms, separated into 2- to 3-inch pieces
Salt and pepper
¼ cup toasted hazelnuts, chopped, plus extra whole for serving
Whisk coffee, soy sauce, honey, and cornstarch in small saucepan until combined. Bring mixture to simmer over medium heat, stirring occasionally, until sauce is clear, slightly thickened and coats back of spoon, 1 to 2 minutes. Cover and set aside.
Heat oil in 12-inch skillet over medium-high heat until shimmering. Add mushrooms and cook until first side is golden brown, 3 to 4 minutes. Using tongs, flip mushrooms and cook until mushrooms are heated through and lightly browned, about 3 minutes longer. Season mushrooms with salt and pepper to taste.
To serve: Spoon coffee sauce on plate and sprinkle with chopped hazelnuts. Arrange mushrooms on top and grate extra hazelnuts over mushrooms. Serve.
Nutrition facts:
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.

References:
https://nutritionsource.hsph.harvard.edu/food-features/mushrooms/
https://nutritionsource.hsph.harvard.edu/food-features/coffee/
