Title: Crunchy Roasted Chickpeas

Oven-roasting chickpeas give them a satisfyingly crispy texture. Add your own favorite blend of spices and toss some chickpeas in a salad, or grab a handful for a healthy snack.
Ingredients
One 15-oz can  chickpeas (garbanzo beans)
1 Tablespoon olive oil
1 teaspoon spice or spice blend of choice (more/less to taste)
 
 Try dried spices like chili powder, cumin, curry powder, cayenne, cinnamon, or fresh herbs such as thyme, rosemary, oregano.
Try dried spices like chili powder, cumin, curry powder, cayenne, cinnamon, or fresh herbs such as thyme, rosemary, oregano.
Instructions
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F.
Strain the chickpeas and rinse well, draining as much water as possible. Lay the chickpeas on a paper towel or dish cloth, and pat dry to absorb the water. For crispier chickpeas, roll the towel over the beans to remove the thin skins (this step is optional but it will further eliminate moisture when baking).
Once fully dry, line a baking sheet and place the chickpeas in the oven to roast for 15 minutes (avoid crowding the baking sheet, especially if doubling the recipe).
Remove chickpeas from the oven and drizzle with olive oil and sprinkle over the spices, making sure they are evenly coated. Place them back into the oven and roast for another 15 minutes (you may need more or less time, just keep an eye on them so they don’t burn).
When done, turn off the oven and keep its door slightly open as it cools down. Note that the chickpeas will be crunchiest following roasting, but can be stored for a few days at room temperature.

Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.

References:

https://nutritionsource.hsph.harvard.edu/food-features/chickpeas-garbanzo-beans/
