Title: Pasta In Zemino with Seafood, Chickpeas, and Greens

Pasta In Zemino with Seafood, Chickpeas, and Greens
2 pounds greens (chard, beet greens, escarole, or spinach), or 12 large handfuls
1½ pounds shellfish (scallops, prawns, squid, or clams), cleaned
 
 If you are using scallops: Remove the muscles from each one. 
 If you are using prawns: Remove the shells and devein if necessary. 
 If you are using squid: Clean and cut into rings about ½ inch wide, keeping the tentacles in one piece unless they are large in which case you may cut them in half. 
 If you are using clams: Allow 16 tiny clams in the shell per person, or about 8 to 10 out of the shell if they are larger.
If you are using scallops: Remove the muscles from each one.
If you are using prawns: Remove the shells and devein if necessary.
If you are using squid: Clean and cut into rings about ½ inch wide, keeping the tentacles in one piece unless they are large in which case you may cut them in half.
If you are using clams: Allow 16 tiny clams in the shell per person, or about 8 to 10 out of the shell if they are larger.
½-¾ cup extra virgin olive oil
1 medium onion, chopped
12 garlic cloves, minced
2 teaspoons hot pepper flakes
2 cups tomatoes diced in ½ inch cubes or canned diced tomatoes or tomato sauce
½ cup dry white wine
1½ cups chickpeas, cooked (optional)
1 pound whole grain pasta, cooked al dente
Cut greens into ½-inch by 3-inch strips, then wash and drain.
Boil the greens in a large quantity of salted water to soften them, about 5 minutes. Drain well, refresh with cold water to set the color, and drain again. Chop coarsely and set aside.
In a large sauté pan, add ½ cup of olive oil and sauté the onion until tender, about 8 minutes. Add the garlic and hot pepper flakes and cook for a minute. Then add the chopped tomatoes or sauce if using, the optional chickpeas with some of their liquid, and the greens. Heat through. This should be a bit soupy.
Season the shellfish with salt and pepper. You may steam them very briefly in the white wine and add the shellfish and wine to the greens. Alternately, you may add the wine along with the tomatoes and cook the shellfish directly in the pan with the greens until the shrimp turn pink, the scallops become opaque, and the squid turns white. The squid will cook in a matter of minutes. Taste the sauce and then season with salt and pepper. Toss with the cooked pasta. Serve at once.
Nutrition facts:
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.

References:

