Title: Spanish Romesco Sauce (Red Pepper and Almond Sauce)

Many people call Romesco sauce “Spanish ketchup.” This sauce is a wonderful accompaniment for grilled vegetables, chicken or fish. It also makes a great sandwich spread.
Spanish Romesco Sauce (Red Pepper and Almond Sauce)
2 ancho chiles, medium, or 1 rounded teaspoon ancho chile powder
1 cup almonds, blanched, or skinned hazelnuts, toasted, or combination of both
4 garlic cloves, large, minced
1 bell pepper, large red, roasted, seeded peeled, chopped
1 cup tomato, peeled, seeded, diced, fresh or canned
1 tablespoon smoked sweet pimenton pepper or sweet paprika
½ teaspoon smoked hot pimenton pepper or cayenne pepper
3 tablespoons red wine or sherry vinegar
1 teaspoon salt
¾ cup extra virgin olive oil
If using whole anchos, soak the chiles in hot water and cover for about 1 hour. Drain, remove the stems and seeds and cut into small pieces. Transfer the chile pieces, or ancho chile powder, if using, to a food processor along with the nuts, garlic, roasted pepper, tomatoes, pimenton, vinegar, and salt.
Pulse a few times to make a chunky paste. Start adding the oil a tablespoon at a time until the mixture emulsifies. Taste. We are looking for sweetness from the peppers, nuttiness, and acidity.
Add salt if necessary to bring up the flavors. Let the sauce rest for 15 minutes for the flavors to come together, taste again and then decide if you want it spicier, saltier, or more vinegary, and adjust accordingly. The sauce keeps, tightly covered, in the refrigerator for up to 6 months. If the oil has risen to the top you may want to re-emulsify it in the food processor, or you can remix it back to a smooth consistency with a small whisk.
Nutrition facts:
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.

References:

