Title: Blueberry Muffin Battle

The average coffee shop blueberry muffin is hardly what you’d call a health food: It’s got almost 470 calories—nearly double what you’d get from a chocolate frosted donut—and most of those calories come from refined  carbohydrates , primarily white flour and sugar. Less than 2 percent of the carbohydrate in these mega-muffins comes from fiber, offering up only a single gram. Perhaps the healthiest thing about these muffins is the  fat —19 grams worth, largely from soybean oil—a heart-healthy source. (Only one of the three national chains reviewed used butter as a fat source in its muffins.)
Reduced fat blueberry muffins are certainly no better—if not worse. With only slightly fewer calories than their regular counterparts, they still contain the same high amount of sugar (almost 40 grams, or 10 teaspoons) and nearly 50 percent more sodium (a whopping 540 milligrams per muffin!).
In comparison, the  Great Muffin Makeover  recipe bakes up  blueberry muffins  that weigh about 2 ounces each—less than half the size of a coffee shop muffin—and contain 120 calories. They are made with a mixture of whole wheat, almond, and white flour—though with further tweaking, the recipe could be made entirely without refined grains. Canola oil provides much of the healthy fat; and the number of fresh blueberries is double what you’d find in a typical recipe, providing much of the flavor and natural sweetness. (In total, each muffin only contains 5 grams of sugar, of which only 2 grams are added sugar). The result is a light and fluffy, moist and flavorful blueberry muffin that will provide longer lasting energy compared to the usual coffee shop muffin.  Get the recipe .
Average data from company websites of three major U.S. coffeeshop chains. January, 2018.
Data obtained from one national coffeeshop chain. January, 2018.
Data based on analysis of  Blueberry Muffin recipe .
Related
The Great Muffin Makeover
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.

References:
https://nutritionsource.hsph.harvard.edu/carbohydrates/
https://nutritionsource.hsph.harvard.edu/what-should-you-eat/fats-and-cholesterol/
https://nutritionsource.hsph.harvard.edu/muffin-makeover/
https://nutritionsource.hsph.harvard.edu/blueberry-muffins/
https://nutritionsource.hsph.harvard.edu/blueberry-muffins/
https://nutritionsource.hsph.harvard.edu/blueberry-muffins/
https://nutritionsource.hsph.harvard.edu/muffin-makeover/
