Title: Blueberry Muffins

If you buy a blueberry muffin at a coffee shop, you’ll likely be buying a muffin that weighs 5 ounces, contains 450 calories, and is made with refined flour and lots of added sugar ( see for yourself ). The muffins from this recipe weigh about 2 ounces, contain 120 calories, and are made with a mixture of whole wheat, white, and  almond  flour. (You don’t need to buy almond flour; you can make your own almond flour by grinding whole almonds in your food processor.) All of the butter was replaced with canola oil. And the amount of fresh blueberries was doubled. Orange zest adds a zingy background note that contrasts nicely with the sweetness of the blueberries. The result is a moist, flavorful blueberry muffin that will provide longer lasting energy compared to the  usual coffee shop muffin .
Blueberry Muffins
1 cup (120 g) whole wheat pastry flour
¾ cup (90 g) white whole wheat flour
¼ cup (26 g) almond flour
1 tsp. (4 g) baking powder
½ tsp. (4 g) baking soda
½ tsp.    (2 g) salt
1 tsp. (2 g) orange zest
1 ½ cups (200 g) fresh blueberries
2 eggs
1¼ cups (286 g) low fat (1%) buttermilk
4 Tbsp. (42   g) brown sugar
6 Tbsp. (78 g) canola oil
1 Tbsp.   (14 g) orange juice, freshly squeezed
½ tsp. (4 g) vanilla
Place the rack in the top third of the oven and preheat the oven to 400 degrees Fahrenheit Line muffin tins with paper liners.
In a large mixing bowl, combine the flours, baking powder, baking soda, salt, and orange zest. Add the fresh blue berries and toss gently to coat the blueberries in flour. This will help keep the blueberries suspended in the batter versus falling to the bottom.
In a medium mixing bowl, lightly beat the eggs, then whisk in the buttermilk, brown sugar, canola oil, orange juice, and vanilla. Don’t be concerned if the mixture looks curdled or lumpy.
Pour the wet ingredients into the dry ingredients and stir until most of the flour is incorporated. The mixture can be slightly lumpy; don’t over mix. Divide the batter among the 18 prepared muffin cups.
Bake 12 to 14 minutes, until the muffins are golden brown around the edges.
Nutrition information per serving (1 muffin, or 1/18 of recipe):
120 calories, 3 g protein, 14 g carbohydrate, 2 g fiber, 5 g sugar (2 g added sugar), 125 mg sodium, 20 mg potassium, 5 g fat (0.5 g sat, 3 g mono, 1.5 g poly, 0 g trans), 20 mg cholesterol
Recipe courtesy of The Culinary Institute of America
Related
The Great Muffin Makeover
Blueberry Muffin Battle
Harvard Chan Cooks: recipe videos
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.

References:
https://nutritionsource.hsph.harvard.edu/blueberry-muffin-battle/
https://nutritionsource.hsph.harvard.edu/food-features/almonds/
https://nutritionsource.hsph.harvard.edu/blueberry-muffin-battle/
https://nutritionsource.hsph.harvard.edu/muffin-makeover/
https://nutritionsource.hsph.harvard.edu/blueberry-muffin-battle/
https://nutritionsource.hsph.harvard.edu/healthy-recipes-cooking/
