Title: Cranberry Orange Muffins

The classic combination of cranberry and orange, in muffin form.
Cranberry Orange Muffins
¾ cup (102 g) dried cranberries
¾ cup (177 g) boiling water
1 ½ cups (180 g) white whole wheat flour
1 Tbsp.   (8 g) cornstarch
¾ cup (64 g) almond flour
⅓ cup (60 g) granulated sugar
1½ tsp.   (7 g) baking powder
½ tsp. (2 g) salt
1 egg yolk
⅔ cup (130 g) canola oil
1 Tbsp.   (26 g) agave nectar (or honey)
4 Tbsp. (60 g) buttermilk
½ tsp. (4 g) vanilla extract
½ cup (121 g) low fat (1%) Greek yogurt
2 tsp. (8 g) orange zest
2 egg whites
Preheat the oven to 375 degrees Farenheit. Line muffin tons with paper liners.
Pour boiling water over the dried cranberries and allow them to soak for 10 minutes.
In a medium mixing bowl, stir together all the dry ingredients.
In the bowl of a stand mixer that is outfitted with a paddle attachment, place the egg yolk, oil, agave, buttermilk, vanilla, and yogurt and mix for two minutes until combined.
Add the dry ingredients in three stages, mixing on low speed and scraping the sides of the bowl with each addition.
Drain the cranberries, discard the water, and add the cranberries to the batter along with the orange zest. Mix to combine.
In a medium bowl, whisk the egg white to medium peaks. Add a small amount of the egg whites to the batter and stir to combine (this will help lighten the batter a bit). Fold the remaining egg whites into the batter, carefully so as not to deflate the whites.
Scoop into muffin tins. Fill the tins three-quarters full. Bake 20 to 22 minutes.
Nutrition information per serving (1 muffin, or 1/18 of recipe):
186 calories, 3 g protein, 19 g carbohydrate, 2 g fiber, 9 g sugar (5 g added sugar),90 mg sodium, 5 mg potassium, 9 g fat (1 g sat, 5.5 g mono, 2.5 g poly, 0 g trans), 10 mg cholesterol
Recipe courtesy of The Culinary Institute of America
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.

References:

