Title: Jalapeño Cheddar Corn Muffins

A small amount of flavorful sharp cheddar contrasts nicely with the sweetness of the cornmeal batter, and the spiciness of the chopped jalapeño.
Jalapeño Cheddar Corn Muffins
¾ cup (120 g) non-degerminated cornmeal
1 cup (220 g) low fat (1%) buttermilk
½ cup (120)g warm water
1 ¾ cup (225 g) white whole wheat flour
¾ cup (90 g) whole wheat pastry flour
¼ cup (45 g) granulated sugar
2 ½ tsp. (10 g) baking powder
½ tsp.    (2 g) salt
1 egg yolk
⅔ cup (130 g) extra virgin olive oil
½ tsp.    (4 g) vanilla extract
1 Tbsp. (24 g) agave nectar (or honey)
2 egg whites
½ cup (66 g) jalapeño peppers, diced
½ cup (78 g) corn kernels, frozen and thawed
½ cup (64 g) sharp cheddar cheese, finely shredded
Preheat oven to 375 degrees Fahrenheit. Line muffin tins with paper liners.
In a small mixing bowl, soak the cornmeal in 1 cup of buttermilk and ½ cup of warm water for 10 to 15 minutes.
Meanwhile, mix the white whole wheat flour, whole wheat pastry flour, sugar, baking powder, and salt in a medium size mixing bowl.
In stand mixer that has been outfitted with the paddle attachment beat the egg yolk with the extra virgin olive oil, vanilla, and agave (or honey) for two minutes until combined. Add the cornmeal-buttermilk mixture and mix to combine.
Add the dry ingredients in three stages, scraping the bowl down after each addition.
Fold in the jalapeno peppers, corn kernels, and cheddar cheese.
Whip the reserved egg whites to medium peak. Add a small amount of the white to the batter and mix in, to lighten the batter. Add the remaining whites and fold carefully to fully incorporate while taking care not to deflate the lightened batter.
Scoop into muffin tins. Fill the tins two-thirds full.
Bake for 20 to 22 minutes.
Nutrition information per serving (1 muffin, or 1/18 of recipe):
195 calories, 4 g protein, 22 g carbohydrate, 3 g fiber, 5 g sugar (4 g added sugar), 150 mg sodium, 40 mg potassium, 5 g fat (2 g sat, 6.5 g mono, 1 g poly, 0 g trans), 15 mg cholesterol
Recipe courtesy of The Culinary Institute of America
Related
The Great Muffin Makeover
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.

References:

https://nutritionsource.hsph.harvard.edu/muffin-makeover/
