Title: Spicy Coconut Rice with Limes

Spicy Coconut Rice with Limes
1 cup brown basmati rice
1 cup low-fat coconut milk
1 cup water
1 tablespoon canola oil
½ cup minced onions
½ seeded and minced jalapeno pepper*
1 teaspoon minced ginger
Juice and zest from 1 lime
Cooking notes* 
 
 You can use the entire jalapeno pepper if desired, but the final dish will be hot. For mild heat, remove the seeds; for more heat, include the seeds. 
 Be careful when cutting hot peppers, as the acid can burn the skin. Wear gloves when handling hot peppers, or wash your hands thoroughly afterward. Be especially careful not to touch your eyes or lips with bare or gloved hands that have handled hot peppers.
Cooking notes*
You can use the entire jalapeno pepper if desired, but the final dish will be hot. For mild heat, remove the seeds; for more heat, include the seeds.
Be careful when cutting hot peppers, as the acid can burn the skin. Wear gloves when handling hot peppers, or wash your hands thoroughly afterward. Be especially careful not to touch your eyes or lips with bare or gloved hands that have handled hot peppers.
In a medium saucepan, whisk together the rice, water, and coconut milk. Bring to a boil over high heat.
Reduce the heat to low, cover, and simmer for 50 minutes or until fluffy and all the liquid is absorbed.
Meanwhile, heat the oil in a sauté pan over medium heat and sauté onions and jalapeno pepper until translucent and tender; do not burn. Remove from heat.
When rice is finished cooking, add ginger, sautéed onions and peppers, lime zest, and lime juice, stir to combine, and serve.
Nutrition facts:
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.

References:

