Title: Grilled Watermelon Salad with Roasted Figs

Grilling and roasting fruit develops caramel flavors. Adding a small amount of intensely flavored, hard cheese like ricotta salata and a bit of sea salt, like fleur de sel, heightens these caramel flavors, making a fresh fruit salad seem like a decadent dessert.
Grilled Watermelon Salad with Roasted Figs
2 pounds watermelon, peeled
¼ cup extra virgin olive oil
1 lime, zested and then juiced
9 fresh figs
2 ounces ricotta salata cheese
2 ounces micro greens or baby greens
2 tablespoons fig or maple syrup
½ teaspoon fleur de sel
Preheat your grill to medium high and preheat your oven to 375 degrees Fahrenheit.
Cut the watermelon into small triangles about 4 inches by 3 inches and about a ½-inch thick; you should have 12 pieces.  Brush with olive oil and chill. Chill six medium-sized salad or dessert plates for serving the salad.
Zest and juice the lime and set aside 1 tablespoon of juice for dressing the greens.
Cut the figs in half and place cut side up on a sheet pan. Brush with olive oil.  Roast for 15 minutes, or until they are soft.
Grate the ricotta salata on a microplane or small grater and set aside in the refrigerator.
Place the chilled plates out on the counter and drizzle with a little of the fig or maple syrup. Grill the watermelon triangles by marking each side for about 45 seconds, repeat until you have cross-hatch marks on either side. Place two pieces of watermelon over the fig or maple syrup and arrange decoratively. Drizzle each plate with lime juice and sprinkle with a little zest.
Place the microgreens or baby greens in a small bowl and add the lime juice.  Add the remaining 2 tablespoons olive oil and toss to coat. Place a small mound on each of the six plated watermelons; sprinkle with ricotta salata.
Place three fig halves around the salad and garnish with fleur de sel; serve immediately.
Nutrition facts:
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.

References:

