Title: Chicken, Shrimp, and Fruit Salad

Chicken, Shrimp, and Fruit Salad
¼ teaspoon salt
1 cup peeled and diced Granny Smith apple
1 cup seedless red grapes, cut in half
1 cup seedless green grapes, cut in half
1 orange, segmented, with each segment cut in half
1 tablespoon garlic, fried
½ cup shallots, fried
1 boneless, skinless chicken breast
16 medium shrimp
4 tablespoons roasted, unsalted peanuts, chopped
1 teaspoon salt
1 teaspoon sugar
2 tablespoons lime juice or lemon juice
2 to 3 serrano chilies
2 tablespoons cilantro leaves
Cut the chicken into long thin strips and put these into a clean medium-sized frying pan. Add water to cover and ¼ teaspoon salt, then bring to a simmer. Simmer gently for about 5 minutes or until the chicken is just done. Remove the chicken from the water and tear it into shreds 1-inch long or cut it into a ¼-inch dice. Save the water in which it was cooked.
Peel and devein the shrimp. Bring the chicken poaching water to a simmer and add the shrimp. Turn the heat to medium-low. Stir and poach the shrimp for 2 to 3 minutes or until they are just cooked through. Drain. Cut the shrimp into a ¼-inch dice. Combine the chicken, shrimp, and peanuts. Cover and set aside.
Combine 1 teaspoon salt, the sugar, and the lime juice in a small bowl and mix. Set aside. Cut the chilies into very fine rounds. Wash and dry the coriander. Cover and set aside.
Combine the apples, grapes, oranges, chicken, and shrimp in a large bowl. Add the lime juice and sugar mixture. Season with salt and pepper. Add in half of the fried shallots and garlic. Toss. Place in a serving bowl and garnish with the reserved shallots, garlic, cilantro leaves, and chilies.
Nutrition facts:
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.

References:

