Title: Spicy Chicken Kebabs

This chicken kebab recipe mixes bold spices with citrus to develop a zesty marinade. Skewering grapes with the chicken is another way to build flavor without adding salt. One kebab makes a great appetizer, or serve two kebabs on a green salad for a delicious, healthful meal.
Spicy Chicken Kebabs
2 garlic cloves
Pinch of salt
1 tsp. coriander seeds
¾ tsp. paprika
¾ tsp. cumin seed
½ tsp. dried thyme
¼ tsp. crushed red pepper
1 tsp. curry powder
black pepper, to taste
3 Tbsp. canola oil
1 Tbsp. lemon juice
1 Tbsp. parsley, chopped
1 pound boneless, skinless chicken breast, cut into 1-inch cubes
About 1 pound of red grapes
In a mortar, pound the garlic with a pinch of salt to make a paste.
In a dry skillet, heat the coriander seeds, paprika, cumin seeds, thyme, crushed red pepper, and curry powder until hot and aromatic, about 30 seconds. Remove from pan and put the mixture into a spice grinder or mortar and pestle. Grind to make a fine powder.
In a bowl, combine the garlic paste, spices, canola oil, lemon juice, parsley, pepper, and chicken cubes. Toss well to coat completely and let marinate several hours, mixing occasionally.
Skewer the chicken and grapes and grill until chicken is cooked through.
Nutrition information per 1 skewer serving (1/12 of recipe):
108 calories,  9 g protein, 6 g carbohydrate,  0 g fiber, 5 g sugar (0 g added sugar), 30 mg sodium, 43 mg potassium, 5 g fat (0 g sat, 2 g mono, 3 g poly, 0 g trans), 0 mg cholesterol
Recipe courtesy of The Culinary Institute of America
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.

References:

