Title: Quick-Pickled Beets & Fennel

Add a burst of color to your tabletop with bright beets and crisp fennel. An easy recipe that you can prepare in advance, this recipe shows another way to prepare veggies – no oven required!
Ingredients  (Serves 16, as a garnish or “pickle”)
2 large beets (we used Chioggia beets)
1 medium bulb of fennel
3/4 cup  red wine vinegar
3/4 cup water
2 teaspoons salt
1/2 teaspoon peppercorns (optional)
a few sprigs of fennel frond (optional)
Instructions
To prepare the vegetables
Slice off the tops and bottoms of the beets, then use a mandoline or sharp knife to slice into very thin rounds. Remove the fennel fronds, and slice the bulb into thin strips.  Pack the sliced fennel and beets into a pint-sized canning jar or heat-proof container. Top with peppercorns and sprigs (if using).
To prepare the brine
In a small saucepan, combine the vinegar, water, and salt. Bring the mixture to a boil, stirring occasionally.
To finish
Pour the mixture into the canning jar or other heat-proof container with the fennel and beets.
Let the mixture cool to room temperature. These quick pickles can be served immediately or refrigerated for later consumption. The pickles will continue to ferment as they sit in the refrigerator, and will keep well for up to a week.
More recipes to  Prioritize Plants for Healthy Holiday Cooking
Nutrition information per serving (1/16 of recipe): 
 12 calories, 0 g protein, 3 g carbohydrate, 1 g fiber, 1 g sugar (includes 0 g added sugar), 300 mg sodium, 94 mg potassium, 0 g fat (0 g sat, 0 g mono, 0 g poly, 0 g trans), 0 mg cholesterol
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.

References:

https://nutritionsource.hsph.harvard.edu/vinegar/
https://nutritionsource.hsph.harvard.edu/2015/11/09/prioritize-plants-for-healthy-holiday-cooking/
