Title: Garden of Life Review: Pros, Cons, Best Products, and More

Garden of Life vitamins and supplements boast a traceable, clean, and carbon-neutral process. The brand’s products are available in retail stores and online. See how they measure up.
Garden of Life is one of the most popular supplement brands on the market. The company offers a variety of products that cover nearly every nutritional need, including protein powders and multivitamins.
Garden of Life takes supplement safety and quality seriously, which is why the company is often recommended by healthcare professionals like doctors and registered dietitians. Customers appreciate the array of nutrition products the company offers and its dedication to transparency.
In this article, we review Garden of Life and take an in-depth look at its products, quality, and safety standards, customer reviews, and more so that you can decide whether Garden of Life is the right fit for you.
Sex and gender exist on a spectrum. We use the terms “women” and “men” throughout this article to reflect the terms used in research and on supplement labels. But your gender identity may not align with what you were assigned at birth.
A doctor may be able to help you better understand what supplemental compounds your body needs.

Garden of Life at a glance
Garden of Life is a supplement company that was founded in 2000 by Jordan Rubin and acquired by Nestlé Health Science in 2017.
The brand has maintained its  B Corporation status , a private certification that measures a company’s environmental and social impact .
In order to be B Corporation certified, a company must meet strict standards for transparency and accountability on factors, such as employee benefits and charitable donations.
Here are some additional ways Garden of Life stands out from many other vitamin companies:
Garden of Life takes pride in being as transparent as possible with its customers. The company has an entire website page dedicated to its traceability practices that outline its  numerous certifications  and the steps it takes to make sure customers are buying clean and safe products.
Garden of Life products are manufactured by third-party certified facilities that meet or exceed  current good manufacturing practices (CGMPs) . These are standards set by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to ensure the pharmaceutical quality of dietary supplements.
Many Garden of Life products are certified by third-party organizations, including  NSF . Garden of Life also offers certified organic and gluten-free products.
Garden of Life is the first supplement company to be  certified carbon neutral , on both a brand and product level, by Carbonfund.org Foundation. Garden of Life has achieved this by choosing carbon-neutral shipping methods, eliminating plastics from its packaging, and creating sustainable products.
Additionally, many Garden of Life products are U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) certified organic and  Marine Stewardship Council (MSC)  certified, both of which require that every product ingredient must be traced back to its origin, such as organic farms and sustainably sourced seafood.
Garden of Life uses high quality ingredients in its supplements and food products, including absorbable forms of vitamins and minerals, grass-fed whey protein, and high potency probiotics.
Its supplements are free from artificial ingredients, including artificial sweeteners and fillers, making them an excellent choice for those who prefer natural, whole food-based products.
Unlike many other supplement brands, Garden of Life products are available in many brick-and-mortar stores, such as grocery stores and pharmacies, and are also sold on the Garden of Life website and other sites, such as Amazon, Thrive Market, and PureFormulas.

Pros and cons of Garden of Life
Garden of Life offers a variety of nutrition products.
Many of its products are certified organic and certified gluten-free.
The sports performance products are NSF Certified for Sport and Informed Choice certified.
Garden of Life uses high quality ingredients, including absorbable forms of nutrients and grass-fed whey protein.
Garden of Life is a certified B Corporation.
The company is certified carbon neutral by third-party certifier Carbonfund.org Foundation.
Garden of Life products can be found in grocery stores and online.
The products are manufactured by third-party certified facilities that meet or exceed the FDA’s CGMPs.
Some of the products can be pricey.
Some products contain sugar alcohols like  erythritol , which some people may prefer to avoid.
Some supplements contain propriety blends that don’t disclose how much of each ingredient is contained within the supplement.

How much does Garden of Life cost?
Because Garden of Life offers so many products, prices vary. For example, most of its multivitamin supplements cost between $30 and $50, but specialty vitamins, like liquid formulations, are more expensive.
Protein powders generally fall in the $40–$60 range.
Although Garden of Life products are more expensive than many drugstore brands like Nature Made and Centrum, its prices reflect the quality of the products, including nutrient forms and ingredient choices.
Garden of Life products frequently go on sale, so customers can save money by using discount codes or in-store coupons.
Garden of Life offers a generous return policy. Any customer who’s unsatisfied with a Garden of Life product can return the item within 60 days of purchase.
Keep in mind that the customer is responsible for paying to ship the product back to the Garden of Life warehouse. Also, this return policy only applies to products purchased on the Garden of Life website.
Garden of Life doesn’t accept items purchased through other distributors as returns, but you might be able to make returns directly to the merchant of purchase.
In order to give an honest and extensive review of Garden of Life products, we took a deep dive into Garden of Life products, its brand reputation, and how its products compare with competitors.
When researching Garden of Life products, we assessed its:
ingredient choices
nutrient forms
sourcing
third-party certifications
We also considered:
pricing
environmental impact
customer satisfaction

Garden of Life offers dietary supplements to suit a wide range of needs
Garden of Life offers a variety of nutrition products, including:
vitamin and mineral supplements
herbal blends
probiotics
protein powders
collagen products
greens powders
coconut oil
fiber supplements
protein bars
Many of its supplements are designed to meet the needs of specific populations, such as:
children
pregnant people
athletes
older adults
It caters to people who have dietary restrictions or preferences. Some Garden of Life products are:
certified vegan
paleo-friendly
keto-friendly
certified gluten-free
vegetarian-friendly
certified organic
Many of its sports-specific products, such as its protein powders and pre-workout supplements, are  NSF Certified for Sport . This is an independent third-party testing certificate verifying that products don’t contain any of more than 270 substances currently banned by major athletic organizations.
Additionally, some products are certified by  Informed Choice , a dietary supplement testing program that regularly tests supplements for prohibited substances.

Product spotlight
Garden of Life has a loyal customer following thanks to its dedication to producing high quality, effective products. Additionally, many of its products have made our best-of lists.
Below is a quick look at four Garden of Life supplements that have been featured on Healthline.
Form   tablet
Dose   1 tablet per day

Mykind Organics Women’s Once Daily Tablets is our pick for the  best overall multivitamin for women  due to its comprehensive formulation designed specifically for women.
We also appreciate that it’s third-party tested, non-GMO verified, and certified organic and vegan.
Mykind Organics Women’s Once Daily contains vitamins and minerals important for women’s health, such as:
B12
iron
iodine
zinc
vitamin D


Just keep in mind that this supplement is missing magnesium, a mineral involved in stress regulation that  tends to be low  in many people’s diets.

Garden of Life mykind Organics supplement line also includes products for men, children, and pregnancy, all of which contain nutrients derived from organic fruits, vegetables, and herbs.



Number of servings :   30 or 60 per bottle
Active ingredient(s) (serving strength) :   vitamin A 900 mcg (100% DV), vitamin C 90 mg (100% DV), vitamin D 25 mcg (125% DV), vitamin E 16 mg (107% DV), vitamin K 120 mcg (100% DV), thiamin 1.38 mg (115% DV), riboflavin 1.5 mg (115% DV), niacin 18.4 mg (115% DV), vitamin B6 8.5 mg (500% DV), folate 400 mcg DFE (100% DV), vitamin B12 5 mcg (208% DV), biotin 120 mcg (400% DV), pantothenic acid 5 mg (100% DV), iron 2.5 mg (14% DV), zinc 3.9 mg (35% DV), selenium 55 mcg (100% DV), manganese 0.8 mg (35% DV), chromium 35 mcg (100% DV), Organic Food Blend 646 mg (Sesbania grandiflora, emblic, apple, curry leaf, guava, holy basil, annatto, lemon, moringa, mushrom, strawberry, cherry, blackberry, blueberry, raspberry, beet, broccoli, carrot, spinach, tomato, green bell pepper, brussels sprout, ginger, garlic, green onion, parsley, cauliflower, red cabbage, asparagus, celery, cucumber, kale)
Certifications :   third-party tested for purity and potency, USDA organic, certified NSF gluten-free, Non-GMO Project verified, certified carbon neutral, certified vegan
Number of servings :   30 or 60 per bottle
Active ingredient(s) (serving strength) :   vitamin A 900 mcg (100% DV), vitamin C 90 mg (100% DV), vitamin D 25 mcg (125% DV), vitamin E 16 mg (107% DV), vitamin K 120 mcg (100% DV), thiamin 1.38 mg (115% DV), riboflavin 1.5 mg (115% DV), niacin 18.4 mg (115% DV), vitamin B6 8.5 mg (500% DV), folate 400 mcg DFE (100% DV), vitamin B12 5 mcg (208% DV), biotin 120 mcg (400% DV), pantothenic acid 5 mg (100% DV), iron 2.5 mg (14% DV), zinc 3.9 mg (35% DV), selenium 55 mcg (100% DV), manganese 0.8 mg (35% DV), chromium 35 mcg (100% DV), Organic Food Blend 646 mg (Sesbania grandiflora, emblic, apple, curry leaf, guava, holy basil, annatto, lemon, moringa, mushrom, strawberry, cherry, blackberry, blueberry, raspberry, beet, broccoli, carrot, spinach, tomato, green bell pepper, brussels sprout, ginger, garlic, green onion, parsley, cauliflower, red cabbage, asparagus, celery, cucumber, kale)
Certifications :   third-party tested for purity and potency, USDA organic, certified NSF gluten-free, Non-GMO Project verified, certified carbon neutral, certified vegan
Form   capsule
Dose   1 capsule per day
CFU count   30 billion
Shelf-stable   no

Garden of Life Dr. Formulated Probiotics Once Daily capsules make our list as one of the  best probiotic supplements .
The product contains 30 million colony-forming units (CFU) of 14 probiotic strains, including:
Bifidobacterium lactis
Lactobacillus rhamnosus
Lactobacillus casei


Probiotics are live organisms that are vulnerable to fluctuations in temperature as well as storage time. The  National Institutes of Health  recommends that customers choose probiotic supplements that include the number of CFU at the end of a product’s shelf life, not at the time of manufacture.

Garden of Life stands by the CFU through the end of the product’s best use date when products are stored in the refrigerator (which ensures that the supplement provides a therapeutic dose of live microorganisms).

This high quality probiotic supplement is certified gluten-free by NSF and is also free of dairy and soy.

Number of servings :   30 per container
Certifications :   non-GMO verified, certified NSF gluten-free, third-party tested for purity and potency
Strains :   Lactobacillus acidophilus, Lactobacillus plantarum, Lactobacillus gasseri, Lactobacillus paracasei, Bifidobacterium lactis, Bifidobacterium bifidum, Bifidobacterium breve, Bifidobacterium infantis, Bifidobacterium longum
Number of servings :   30 per container
Certifications :   non-GMO verified, certified NSF gluten-free, third-party tested for purity and potency
Strains :   Lactobacillus acidophilus, Lactobacillus plantarum, Lactobacillus gasseri, Lactobacillus paracasei, Bifidobacterium lactis, Bifidobacterium bifidum, Bifidobacterium breve, Bifidobacterium infantis, Bifidobacterium longum
Protein type   plant-based blend
Serving size   2 scoops (42 g)
Available flavors   Chocolate, Vanilla

Garden of Life offers a variety of both plant and animal-based protein powders.
Garden of Life Sport Organic Plant-Based Protein Powder is made from a blend of plant-based proteins — including lentils, navy beans, peas, and garbanzo beans — and is a good option for those following a plant-based diet, earning it a spot in our roundup of the  best protein powders .
Each serving provides 30 grams (g) of highly absorbable protein as well as 2 billion CFU of probiotics and an antioxidant blend to support recovery after workouts.

This protein powder contains zero added sugar and is  NSF Certified for Sport  and Informed Choice certified, making it a popular choice amongst gym-goers and athletes.

Number of servings :   19 per container
Certifications :   USDA organic, non-GMO verified, NSF Certified for Sport, Informed Choice certified, certified gluten-free
Nutrition stats per serving :   (Vanilla) Calories: 160, Total carbs: 7 g, Added sugar: 0 g, Fat: 3 g, Protein: 30 g
Number of servings :   19 per container
Certifications :   USDA organic, non-GMO verified, NSF Certified for Sport, Informed Choice certified, certified gluten-free
Nutrition stats per serving :   (Vanilla) Calories: 160, Total carbs: 7 g, Added sugar: 0 g, Fat: 3 g, Protein: 30 g
Form   tablet
Dose   2 tablets per day

If you’re looking for a natural beauty boost, Garden of Life mykind Organics Plant Collagen Builder may be a good option.
This product contains vitamins, minerals, and other ingredients meant to support your body’s ability to maintain the appearance and overall health of your hair, joints, skin, and nails.
For example, it provides vitamin C, which is necessary for the production of collagen, the most abundant protein in your body that provides  support, strength, and structure  to your skin, tendons, bones, and more.
It also provides minerals essential for skin health, like  zinc , as well as antioxidants like green tea, which  protect cells from damage  caused by the sun, pollution, and more.
Unlike many  skin, nail, and hair supplements , Garden of Life mykind Organics Plant Collagen Builder is made with plant-based ingredients and is free from animal products, making it a safe choice for those following a vegan diet.
Number of servings :   30 per container
Active ingredient(s) :   vitamin A 2,000 IU (40% DV), vitamin C 30 mg (50% DV), vitamin E 5 IU (15% DV), thiamin 0.2 mg (15% DV), riboflavin 0,2 mg (10% DV), niacin 3 mg (15% DV), vitamin B6 1 mg (50% DV), folate 70 mcg (20% DV), biotin 2,500 mcg (830% DV), pantothenic acid 1 mg (10% DV), zinc 0.5 mg (4% DV), selenium 12 mcg (15% DV), manganese 20 mcg (15% DV), chromium 20 mcg (15% DV), silica 10 mg, certified organic food blend 686 mg, certified organic beauty blend 194 mg, organic turmeric 50 mg
Certifications :   certified vegan, certified organic, non-GMO verified, certified gluten-free, certified kosher
Returns :
Shipping :
Number of servings :   30 per container
Active ingredient(s) :   vitamin A 2,000 IU (40% DV), vitamin C 30 mg (50% DV), vitamin E 5 IU (15% DV), thiamin 0.2 mg (15% DV), riboflavin 0,2 mg (10% DV), niacin 3 mg (15% DV), vitamin B6 1 mg (50% DV), folate 70 mcg (20% DV), biotin 2,500 mcg (830% DV), pantothenic acid 1 mg (10% DV), zinc 0.5 mg (4% DV), selenium 12 mcg (15% DV), manganese 20 mcg (15% DV), chromium 20 mcg (15% DV), silica 10 mg, certified organic food blend 686 mg, certified organic beauty blend 194 mg, organic turmeric 50 mg
Certifications :   certified vegan, certified organic, non-GMO verified, certified gluten-free, certified kosher
Returns :
Shipping :

Safety callouts
Garden of Life takes supplement quality and safety seriously. The Garden of Life  website  states that its products go through extensive third-party testing and that third-party certifications, such as USDA certified organic, ensure its products meet strict safety standards.
With that said, it’s always important to read supplement labels carefully and talk with a healthcare professional before adding any new supplements to your wellness routine.
Garden of Life products contain a wide variety of nutrients, compounds, herbs, fruits, and vegetables, some of which interact with certain prescription medications or are not appropriate for people who are pregnant, breastfeeding, or have an underlying medical condition.
For safety purposes, don’t take more than the recommended dose of a supplement, unless recommended by a healthcare professional.

Garden of Life vs. competitors
Here’s how Garden of Life stacks up against other popular supplement companies in terms of product offerings, price, certifications, and third-party testing.

Customer reviews and ratings
Online customer reviews for Garden of Life are mostly positive. For example, at time of publication, the company’s  Dr. Formulated Once Daily Men’s Probiotics  has over 10,000 reviews on Amazon, 78% of which are 5 stars.
Customers seem to appreciate Garden of Life’s dedication to transparency. Many reviews mention that taking Garden of Life supplements has improved their health. A number of reviews also mention that Garden of Life has excellent customer service and that customers were pleased with how they were treated by company employees.
Less favorable reviews note that some of the protein powders don’t taste good and that some Garden of Life supplements are too expensive.

Frequently asked questions
Yes. Overall, Garden of Life is a high quality supplement brand. Garden of Life offers a variety of products, including protein powders and multivitamins, that contain effective ingredients derived from whole foods.
Its products are third-party tested, and many Garden of Life products, such as its sport supplements, are certified by third-party organizations like NSF.
Yes. Overall, Garden of Life is a high quality supplement brand. Garden of Life offers a variety of products, including protein powders and multivitamins, that contain effective ingredients derived from whole foods.
Its products are third-party tested, and many Garden of Life products, such as its sport supplements, are certified by third-party organizations like NSF.
Short answer, no, its vitamins are not manufactured in China.

The company does source ingredients from Canada, China, Germany, and the United States among other countries. Garden of Life also sells products to partners in China, but everything is manufactured in the United States.
Short answer, no, its vitamins are not manufactured in China.

The company does source ingredients from Canada, China, Germany, and the United States among other countries. Garden of Life also sells products to partners in China, but everything is manufactured in the United States.

One of the benefits of Garden of Life products is that, unlike many other supplement companies, its products are available in many brick-and-mortar stores, such as grocery stores like Whole Foods as well as supplement and drug stores like GNC and Walgreens.

You can also purchase Garden of Life products directly from the Garden of Life website or through websites like Amazon, Thrive Market, and PureFormulas.

One of the benefits of Garden of Life products is that, unlike many other supplement companies, its products are available in many brick-and-mortar stores, such as grocery stores like Whole Foods as well as supplement and drug stores like GNC and Walgreens.

You can also purchase Garden of Life products directly from the Garden of Life website or through websites like Amazon, Thrive Market, and PureFormulas.
Yes. According to the company, all Garden of Life products are tested by a third party to ensure label claim accuracy. The company keeps certificates of analysis (COAs) on record for all raw materials.
COAs are documents that verify that a supplement or material has undergone testing and meets specific quality standards. What’s more, all finished products are tested contaminants such as heavy metals, microbial growth, and pathogenic species such as E. coli and Salmonella.
Yes. According to the company, all Garden of Life products are tested by a third party to ensure label claim accuracy. The company keeps certificates of analysis (COAs) on record for all raw materials.
COAs are documents that verify that a supplement or material has undergone testing and meets specific quality standards. What’s more, all finished products are tested contaminants such as heavy metals, microbial growth, and pathogenic species such as E. coli and Salmonella.

The bottom line
Garden of Life is a supplement company that offers an impressive selection of nutrition products, including multivitamins, specialty supplement blends, protein powders, and food products.
The Garden of Life products go through extensive third-party testing, and some products are verified by third-party organizations like NSF and Informed Choice.
Plus, a number of Garden of Life products are certified gluten-free and vegan, which makes them a good choice for people with dietary restrictions.
What’s more, Garden of Life products are available in many popular stores, such as Whole Foods and GNC. This makes it a convenient choice for those who prefer shopping for supplements in person rather than online.
Just make sure to talk with a trusted healthcare professional before taking any new supplements.

References:

https://www.bcorporation.net/en-us/find-a-b-corp/company/garden-of-life-llc
https://www.gardenoflife.com/product-traceability
https://www.fda.gov/drugs/pharmaceutical-quality-resources/facts-about-current-good-manufacturing-practices-cgmps
https://www.nsfsport.com/
https://www.gardenoflife.com/blog/journey-to-carbon-neutrality/
https://www.msc.org/en-us
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/erythritol/
https://www.nsfsport.com/our-mark.php
https://www.healthline.comhttps://choice.wetestyoutrust.com/about/certification-process
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/multivitamins-womens-health
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7649274/
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/best-probiotic-supplement
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/lactobacillus-rhamnosus
https://www.healthline.com/health/digestive-health/lactobacillus-casei
https://www.healthline.comhttps://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/Probiotics-HealthProfessional/
https://www.healthline.com/health/best-protein-powder
https://www.nsfsport.com/our-mark.php
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK507709
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/zinc
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8776015/
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/best-hair-skin-and-nails-vitamins
https://www.healthline.comhttps://gardenoflifecanada.com/blogs/lifestyle/what-third-party-certifications-mean-to-us
https://www.amazon.com/Garden-Life-Formulated-Probiotics-Strains/dp/B00Y8MP5VA?rvo_aff=1&rvo_brandid=Garden+of+Life&rvo_prodid=697e227c-ba66-4b71-9ae5-2407d0737896&rvo_subid=697e227c-ba66-4b71-9ae5-2407d0737896&tag=healthline-subtag-20&rvo_subid2=%2Fnutrition%2Fgarden-of-life-reviews&ascsubtag=null&correlationId=null
