Title: Snap Kitchen Review: Healthy Meals Without the Prep

Snap Kitchen offers a diverse menu with meals catering to people on keto, paleo, and low carb diets. But with limited options for other diets and concerns about sustainability, it may require consideration.

Healthline score: 3.6 out of 5
Snap Kitchen is a meal delivery service that aims to make healthy eating easy and convenient.
Featuring a rotating menu with more than 30 meals to choose from each week, Snap Kitchen has plenty of fresh and delicious options that fit a variety of dietary patterns.
This article takes an in-depth look at Snap Kitchen, including how it works, the menu, how much it costs, and whether it’s worth the price.
Our tester rated Snap Kitchen across nine categories and allotted points from 0–5. The scores below reflect the average rating for each category.
Overall:  3.6
Sign-up, delivery, and cancellation processes:  3
Meal variety:  3.5
Nutrition:  4
Sustainability:  2
Ingredient quality and freshness:  4.5
Ease of preparation:  5
Taste:  4.5
Affordability:  2
Learn more about  how we test meal kits .

Pros and cons at a glance
extensive rotating menu with choices for several dietary patterns
more affordable than many similar services
offers free shipping
provides single-serving meals that require minimal preparation
may aid weight loss
limited selections for vegans and vegetarians
unsuitable for severe food allergies
uses conventionally grown produce
may provide portions too small for active people
packaging isn’t environmentally friendly

What is Snap Kitchen?
Snap Kitchen is a  meal delivery service  that sends customers fresh, fully prepared meals each week.
The service offers options that accommodate some dietary restrictions, such as the  keto diet . Customers also have the option of selecting meals from the full menu to create a custom plan.
Each week, you can order a bundle with your choice of either 6 or 12 meals, which all arrive on the same day.
The meals are individually portioned and require just one step of preparation — microwave heating — which can save you time and energy throughout the week.
All meals are  gluten-free , soy-free, and free of preservatives, antibiotics, artificial sweeteners, and hormones.
Common allergens, including  eggs ,  milk , tree nuts, peanuts, soy, shellfish, and fish, are labeled. Though the company cannot change individual recipes, you can filter the menu to exclude meals with various  potential allergens .
Snap Kitchen can be a good solution for busy people who want to eat healthfully without much effort. Snap Kitchen’s website claims that its customers save an average of more than 4 hours per week on shopping, cooking, and cleaning.

Who tried it

How it works
Signing up for Snap Kitchen is simple, and the company is similar to other meal and ingredient delivery services, such as  Sunbasket  and  Green Chef .
You can sign up for a subscription by placing an order online. On the first page, you’ll decide whether you want 6 or 12 meals per week, provide your ZIP code and email address, and choose a date for your first delivery.
In the second stop, you’ll fill your box.
Finally, you’ll confirm and check out. This will sign you up for a weekly delivery from Snap Kitchen.
Once you fill out your basic info on the initial sign-up screen, you’ll be able to peruse 30 different meals and read details on what’s included in each. To select a meal, you just click the “add to box” button. Once you’ve selected your chosen number of meals, you’ll check out.
The menu changes every 6–8 weeks, so even on the smaller plan, you’ll likely have some repeat meals before the menu is updated.
If you want to switch from the 12-meal plan to the 6-meal plan or vice versa, you can change your plan by emailing the company.
Snap Kitchen has a “Lock Date,” which is the deadline to skip or make changes to menu items, delivery address, payment method, and other aspects of your order. This date will vary depending on your delivery day, and you can find it on the Snap Kitchen website.
Here are a few examples of meals on the menu:
Chicken Piccata Meatballs with Roasted Broccolini
Honey Dijon Roasted Salmon
Chicken Caesar Wrap
Baked Ziti with Italian Beef Sausage
Chicken Tikka Masala with Basmati Rice
Chicken Enchiladas with Tomatillo Salsa
When I made my selections for my initial box, I was able to include a variety of meals that satisfied my breakfast, lunch, and dinner needs. There was a wide variety of options, and I had no trouble finding choices that fit my preferences.

Diet friendliness
Snap Kitchen is a nice option for people who want single-serving meals that require zero prep work and can be ready to enjoy in minutes.
This service has meals that meet general nutrition needs, as well as options that are created to meet the unique needs of  keto ,  low carb ,  high protein ,  paleo , and  Whole30  diets. Each meal is gluten- and soy-free.
Meatless options are limited, so this service may not be ideal for those following  vegan  or  vegetarian  diets.
Meals that contain any of the top 10 allergens are labeled on the website. However, the service doesn’t guarantee that there’s no risk of cross contamination. Snap Kitchen doesn’t appear to offer meals that are  certified kosher  or  halal .

Cost
Snap Kitchen offers one-time purchases for pickup or local delivery near any of their Texas locations.
Those who are not local can sign up for Snap Pass, which is a free membership that allows you to set up weekly recurring orders and receive a 5% discount on all orders.
You can choose from the 6-meal bundle, which costs $13.94 per meal, or the 12-meal bundle, which costs $11.34 per meal.
Skipping or canceling can be done through your online account, but you’ll need to do so before the “lock date” once your order is placed.
Delivery fees vary based on location.

Delivery and packaging
Delivery is currently available to most of the United States but limited in certain regions. You can enter your ZIP code on the website to determine availability in your area.
In certain areas of Texas, including Austin and Houston, customers can opt to pick up their orders from a Snap Kitchen retail store.
My package arrived intact and at an appropriate temperature. The meals were packaged in a foam container with cardboard and ice packs inside, which certainly helped preserve the temperature and keep my meals fresh.
However, the foam isn’t biodegradable and may not be something you can throw in your curbside recycling, depending on where you live. Therefore, it may end up in the landfill.
Each item came in its own microwave-safe plastic container.
The company says it uses bisphenol A (BPA)-free recyclable plastics in its products. However, this doesn’t mean that the products are free of other  bisphenols , such as BPS, which is a common substitute for BPA that hasn’t been subject to extensive research.
To minimize the risk of plastic compounds leeching into foods, it’s best to microwave the food in a separate  microwave-safe dish  — ceramic or glass is usually a good option.
Sauces and other ingredients that weren’t meant to be heated were packaged in smaller plastic containers to be removed before I heated the meals. Everything appeared fresh and appealing.
The packaging uses quite a bit of plastic, which isn’t environmentally friendly. And for people who are trying to limit their exposure to microplastics, heating meals in these packages will not be ideal.
Depending on where you live, your meals will spend 1–3 days in transit from Snap Kitchen to your door. The company assures customers that its packaging keeps meals fresh and cool for 72 hours without refrigeration. Available delivery days are calculated based on your location.

Ingredient quality and freshness
According to its website, Snap Kitchen uses high quality ingredients sourced from local suppliers whenever possible. You can view the full ingredient lists for different meals on the company’s website.
Animal products are one category of ingredients for which quality is often a concern.
Snap Kitchen uses red meat that’s  antibiotic-free  and has no added hormones, as well as wild-caught shrimp and cod, and open-ocean farm-raised salmon. Its poultry products are cage-free, and eggs are both cage-free and certified humane.
While some meals may contain  organic ingredients , many also contain conventional produce.
Keep in mind that the meals are made in a kitchen that processes common  allergens , which may not suit those with severe food allergies.
The meals arrive cooked and packaged with ice packs, ready to be stored in the refrigerator until use.
Because I’m a registered dietitian, freshness is extremely important to me. I do everything I can to avoid  foodborne illnesses , and opting for fresh foods that are safe to eat is key.
In my experience, each Snap Kitchen meal was fresh and nothing appeared spoiled or unsafe to eat. The vegetables weren’t mushy or brown, and the meat had a perfect consistency. Nothing smelled “off,” and everything tasted just as I expected.

Taste
The meals I tried were as described on the website. While the serving sizes were appropriate for me, my larger husband still felt hungry and unsatisfied after eating some of the dishes.
As a dietitian, I prioritize eating produce with my meals, and I didn’t feel that these meals included sufficient quantities of  vegetables . Most dishes contained some vegetables, but in my professional opinion, they didn’t provide enough to count as a standard vegetable serving.
Many dishes were a tad spicy for my taste. However, my husband said they tasted great to him. For those who enjoy more spice, these dishes may be a good fit in terms of flavor.

Effectiveness for weight loss
Most Snap Kitchen meals contain between 300 and 650  calories , which could help those aiming to decrease their calorie intake to  lose weight .
The service also offers various meals that are  high in protein , packing 30–45 grams (g) of protein into each serving, which may support  weight management and improve health .
Many of the meals are also rich in  fiber , which could be linked to  increased weight loss  and  reduced belly fat .
Additionally, Snap Kitchen offers meals tailored to several specific dietary patterns that have been linked to weight loss, including low carb, paleo, and ketogenic diets, that some individuals may adapt for weight loss. However, it’s important to note that most  research  concludes that caloric intake, rather than specific diet, is the biggest driving factor of weight loss.

Overall thoughts and whether I’d use Snap Kitchen again
Snap Kitchen may be a good option for those looking to add more flavorful and nutritious meals to their diet while saving time on grocery shopping, cooking, and cleaning.
It could also be a good solution for people who are unable to cook for themselves due to illness, age, or general lack of culinary skills.
The service may appeal to people who follow a low carb, ketogenic, or  paleo diet , as it offers several plans to choose from.
It may not be suitable for individuals with severe food allergies or those following a vegan, vegetarian, or kosher diet. And for those who prioritize eating organic food, Snap Kitchen isn’t the best choice.
Snap Kitchen was a great service to have on tap to support my busy but healthy lifestyle. I found myself adding fruit and veggies to supplement the dishes, but it was still helpful to have the base for a healthy meal ready to enjoy within minutes.
However, because of the cost, I would not make this service part of my regular week-to-week routine. If I had a few weeks where I knew that my schedule would be extra-hectic and that preparing healthy meals might be a challenge, I could see this service being helpful.

Brand reputation
Snap Kitchen, which was founded in 2010, makes a point of donating meals to those in need, such as teachers, first responders, and frontline workers, in addition to offering meal subscription plans.
According to its website, the service’s meals are created under the guidance of registered dietitians.
On Snap Kitchen’s website, subscribers praise the flavor and quality of the menu options.
However, Snap Kitchen reviews on the  Better Business Bureau  website express frustrations about billing and issues with subscription service charges.

Alternatives to consider
Several meal delivery services on the market are similar to Snap Kitchen.
For example, The Good Kitchen provides a variety of breakfast, lunch, and dinner options suitable for several  dietary patterns  and preferences, including  Whole30  and gluten-free diets.
However,  The Good Kitchen  is slightly more expensive than Snap Kitchen, with plans starting at $11.50–$15 per meal.
Factor  is another similar service that delivers fresh single-serving meals starting at $10.99 per serving.
Factor offers choices for several dietary patterns and provides more detailed information on the sourcing and quality of ingredients than Snap Kitchen does. This may be an important consideration for some people.
Other meal services to consider include  CookUnity , which comes with a higher price tag, but offers restaurant-worthy flavors, as well as  Trifecta Nutrition , the service featured Netflix’s “You Are What You Eat.”

Frequently asked questions
Snap Kitchen offers a variety of heat-and-eat meals that cater to several dietary preferences. If you order takeout frequently or don’t like to cook, it could be a good way to save time and money.
However, unlike services that allow you to choose your preferred number of meals each week, Snap Kitchen subscriptions automatically include either 6 or 12 meals per week.
Snap Kitchen offers a variety of heat-and-eat meals that cater to several dietary preferences. If you order takeout frequently or don’t like to cook, it could be a good way to save time and money.
However, unlike services that allow you to choose your preferred number of meals each week, Snap Kitchen subscriptions automatically include either 6 or 12 meals per week.
Snap Kitchen doesn’t use preservatives, so the company recommends refrigerating and enjoying meals within 3 to 7 days of receiving them.
According to a Snap Kitchen representative, some customers have been successful when freezing their meals.
If you choose to freeze any item, the company suggests freezing it as close as possible to the date you receive it.
In addition, Snap Kitchen recommends removing the meal from the freezer and placing it in the refrigerator the day before you want to eat it so that it has plenty of time to defrost prior to reheating.
Any smaller containers of ingredients that are not cooked, such as tomatoes, olives, or tabbouleh, shouldn’t be frozen with the main meal.
Snap Kitchen doesn’t use preservatives, so the company recommends refrigerating and enjoying meals within 3 to 7 days of receiving them.
According to a Snap Kitchen representative, some customers have been successful when freezing their meals.
If you choose to freeze any item, the company suggests freezing it as close as possible to the date you receive it.
In addition, Snap Kitchen recommends removing the meal from the freezer and placing it in the refrigerator the day before you want to eat it so that it has plenty of time to defrost prior to reheating.
Any smaller containers of ingredients that are not cooked, such as tomatoes, olives, or tabbouleh, shouldn’t be frozen with the main meal.
Snap Kitchen meals come fully prepared and only require heating, so you won’t have to do any cooking.
Snap Kitchen meals come fully prepared and only require heating, so you won’t have to do any cooking.
Snap Kitchen meals should be consumed within 3 to 7 days of receiving them to ensure freshness and quality. If you need to extend this period, some meals may be able to be frozen. Always check the specific meal instructions for the best results.
Snap Kitchen meals should be consumed within 3 to 7 days of receiving them to ensure freshness and quality. If you need to extend this period, some meals may be able to be frozen. Always check the specific meal instructions for the best results.

The bottom line
Snap Kitchen is a convenient meal delivery service that provides a selection of fresh and flavorful meals.
Compared with similar services, it’s relatively affordable and provides options for several eating patterns, including keto, paleo, low carb, and high protein diets.
However, it provides very few choices for other diets and offers limited information on the sourcing of ingredients, which may not be ideal for some people.
Additionally, the shipping and packaging materials aren’t as sustainable as those of some other services, so if sustainability is a priority, this service may not be the best option for you.

References:

https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/how-we-test-meal-kits
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/best-meal-delivery-service
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/ketogenic-diet-101
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/gluten-free-diet
https://www.healthline.com/health/allergies/egg
https://www.healthline.com/health/allergies/milk
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/common-food-allergies
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/sun-basket-review
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/green-chef-review
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/ketogenic-diet-101
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/low-carb-diet-meal-plan-and-menu
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/high-protein-diet-plan
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/paleo-diet-meal-plan-and-menu
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/whole-30
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/vegan-diet-guide
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/vegetarian-diet-plan
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/what-is-kosher
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/kosher-vs-halal
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7071457/
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/can-you-microwave-plastic
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/antibiotics-in-your-food
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/what-is-organic-food
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/common-food-allergies
https://www.healthline.com/health/food-borne-illness
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/14-healthiest-vegetables-on-earth
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK499909/
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/30-ways-to-lose-weight-naturally
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/20-delicious-high-protein-foods
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/high-protein-diet-plan#daily-protein-requirements
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/why-is-fiber-good-for-you
https://www.healthline.comhttps://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31174214/
https://www.healthline.comhttps://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31897475/
https://www.healthline.comhttps://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33107442/
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/paleo-diet-meal-plan-and-menu
https://www.bbb.org/us/tx/austin/profile/restaurants/snap-kitchen-0825-90087562
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/best-diet-plans
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/whole-30
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/good-kitchen-review
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/factor-75
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/cookunity-reviews
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/trifecta-meals
