Title: The 12 Best Running Shoes for Wide Feet


A quick look at the best running shoes for wide feet
Best overall:   New Balance Fresh Foam 1080v11
Best for daily running:  Asics GT-2000 10
Best for orthotics:   Saucony Echelon 8 Extra Wide
Extra width options:  New Balance 990v5
Best for cross training:  Altra Solstice XT2
Best for support:  Brooks Adrenaline GTS 22
Best for ultralight:  HOKA Clifton 8
Best trail runners:   Altra   Lone Peak 6
Best budget:  Nike Air Zoom Pegasus
Best low heel-to-toe drop:  Altra Escalante 2.5
Best stability:  HOKA Arahi 6
Best for versatility:  On Cloudstratus
Whether your foot is naturally wide or needs extra room to allow for swelling during a long run, finding a good running shoe is key to keeping wide feet happy and healthy.
If your feet feel cramped or you regularly get blisters, bunions, corns, or calluses — or if your toes or feet feel like they’re falling asleep — your current shoes might be too tight.
To ensure the right fit for a wide shoe, it’s best to test drive a few — in a store, of course — before you settle on a pair.
When ordering, you may notice a number corresponding to a letter for the width.
Here’s a general width sizing chart for men’s shoes:
2E:  wide
4E:  X-wide
6E:  XX-wide
some brands offer widths larger than 6E
Here’s a general width sizing chart for women’s shoes:
D:  wide
2E:  X-wide
4E:  XX-wide


How we chose the best running shoes for wide feet
The shoes in this roundup were chosen based on the following criteria:
Customer reviews.  Online customer reviews from various sites like Amazon, RoadRunnerSports, and brand websites helped determine which products made this list. The shoes below have mostly positive reviews.
Features and material quality.  Features to consider include extra cushioning, the heel counter, heel cushioning, forefoot cushioning, heel-to-toe drop, sock liner, a waterproof upper (front), and breathability.
Reputable companies.  The shoes in this list all come from established companies with positive industry reputations.
Available in men’s and women’s models.  Running shoes often come in both men’s and women’s models. While the performance features might be the same, you may notice a difference in how the shoe fits.
Here are the 12 best running shoes for wide feet in 2022.
General price ranges with dollar signs ($ to $$$) are indicated below. One dollar sign means the product is rather affordable, whereas three dollar signs indicate a higher cost.
Generally, list prices range from $120–$184.99, though this may vary depending on where you shop.
Pricing guide
$  = under $125
$$  = $125-$145
$$$  = above $145
We use “men’s” and “women’s” in this article to align with how products are sold on retail sites, but that doesn’t mean you need to stick to one or the other. Choose the product with the fit, style, and features that work best for you.

Healthline’s picks for the top running shoes for wide feet
Price:  $$$
Pros:  good fit for feet that need slightly more room than standard shoes provide, available in a lot of colors, ultra-cushioned lightweight ride
Cons:  pricier than other shoes, thick sole, may not be wide enough for really wide feet
New Balance tops the list of brands that specialize in wide feet. But sometimes, wide and W-wide shoes are too big for certain feet. And that’s where the Fresh Foam 1080v11 comes in. This running shoe is designed for slightly wider than average feet, giving runners just a bit more room in the toe box, and it’s also available in wide sizes.
The New Balance Fresh Foam 1080v11 is also versatile, lightweight, and flexible. Plus, this stylish option boasts extra cushioning that cradles your foot from heel to toe, making it a top pick for long training runs, short distances, gym workouts, and daily use.
Customers rave about the comfort, stability, and support these shoes provide during daily use and while running. However, some find the fit not wide enough for extra-wide feet.
Price:  $$
Pros:  available in a variety of widths, wide toe box, comfortable and responsive ride
Cons:  limited color options for 2E and 4E, runs long, thick tongue
The Asics GT-2000 10 is one of the most affordable, high quality running shoes on the market. It’s also one of the best choices for runners who pronate and need a neutral shoe for low arches or flat feet.
This extra-wide shoe is designed with long distances in mind. Its additional cushioning in the midsole and added support in key areas like the medial arch and outer sole aid your feet throughout the gait cycle.
When looking online, make sure to add 2E, 4E, or D to your search to find the wide options.
Customers often comment on the support and lightweight feel of the shoe but sometimes have trouble finding sizes in the 4E width.
Price:  $$-$$$
Pros:  orthotic-friendly sockliner, wide toe box, American Podiatric Medical Association Seal of Approval, orthotic-friendly
Cons:  men’s extra wide is pricier than other shoes, limited color options
Simplicity and versatility play a significant role in shoe selection, which is why the Echelon 8 from Saucony is worth checking out. Balanced and stable, it meets a wide range of needs for runners looking for a neutral running shoe with a generous fit.
With a spacious toe box and wide mid-foot and forefoot, the Echelon is designed to give a comfy ride to wide feed. Plus, it has plenty of room for a full-length orthotic shoe insert.
Runners with wide feet rave about the space in these shoes, especially since they have room for an orthotic. Customers with flat and wide feet also appreciate the fit of the Echelon 8. Some people comment on the limited availability of the extra wide in certain sizes and colors, but this does not seem to be as much of an issue for the regular wide.
Price:  $$$
Pros:  wide toe box, generous bounce, simple design
Cons:  higher price, limited color options, runs a bit large
The New Balance 990v5 is an investment, but it’s one worth making if you need a wide shoe. Both men’s and women’s sizes are available in multiple widths, including wide, X-wide, and XX-wide.
Made with suede, breathable mesh, and a comfortable Ortholite insert, this shoe offers a perfect blend of stability and cushioning.
Customers like the variety in sizes and widths, as well as the comfort and support the shoe provides for wider feet. However, some faithful users say this version does not provide the same stability as the previous one.
Price:  $$
Pros:  good for all fitness needs, balanced cushioning, flexible, minimalist, zero heel-to-toe drop
Cons:  only available in black and white colors, not a good choice for long runs
If you’re looking for a cushioned and supportive daily trainer that also works for wide feet, the Solstice XT2 is a staple in the Altra lineup. It’s also a favorite among runners who want a shoe that also doubles as a cross-trainer.
The Altra Solstice XT2 sports a fairly wide toe box. Reviewers also say it provides great arch support, flexibility, and soft cushioning. Plus, its design makes it a nice choice for wearing to work or the gym.
Customers like the minimalist design and wide toe box. They also like its versatility as a daily trainer that you can run in. Some regular Altra fans say this model is not as wide as other shoes and not ideal for long runs.
Price:  $$
Pros:  added support and cushioning, keeps excess movement in check
Cons:  limited 4E width options, higher heel-to-toe drop, firmer midsole than previous model
If you need cushion, support, and medium stability with the option to go wide, the Brooks Adrenaline GTS 22 is worth a try.
Designed for all running types, the Adrenaline is a better fit for runners with a medium to high arch.
Brooks uses a GuideRails system on the medial and lateral side of the shoe to minimize roll. If you tend to supinate or pronate, the GuideRails will activate to keep excess movement in check.
The Adrenaline is available in wide (2E) and extra wide (4E).
Customers like the cushioning and support from the GuideRails system. They also like that the 22 is similar to other models, instead of feeling like a brand-new design. However, finding sizes and colors in the 4E is a bit challenging.
Price:  $$
Pros:  ultralight midsole foam, soft ride, balanced cushioning, low heel-to-toe drop, American Podiatric Medical Association Seal of Approval
Cons:  thicker sole, more narrow than previous versions
Ultralight, sleek, and roomy, the HOKA Clifton 8 is a top pick for wide-foot runners looking for a lightweight, neutral shoe that delivers a soft ride.
The men’s model weighs 8.9 ounces and the women’s a mere 7.2 ounces, making it a good option for those who put in a lot of miles.
Customers like the versatility of this shoe, saying they can wear it to work and running. Plus, they rave about the comfort and wide toe box. However, some users find the attached tongue uncomfortable and the appearance too bulky.
Price:  $$
Pros:  neutral and earth-tone colors, customizable lacing system, sole designed for gripping and traction, wide toe box
Cons:  heavier than other shoes, not the best shoe for deep mud
Trail running requires a shoe that can handle rough terrain, changing landscape, hills, tight turns, and the occasional jump over a puddle.
With all this movement, runners with wide feet need a shoe that feels secure.
The Altra Lone Peak 6 features a wider toe box and overall fit to accommodate wide feet while providing a secure and supportive shoe that can tackle any trail. It also has balanced cushioning at your heel and forefoot, encouraging better alignment and form.
Customers like the sturdiness of this shoe, allowing them to feel supported on uneven terrain. They also appreciate the cushioning and traction. However, some users dislike the color options and say the shoe fits larger than previous versions.
Price:  $
Pros:  affordable price, lots of color choices, wider forefoot, breathable mesh upper, high level of cushioning
Cons:  thicker upper feels warmer than previous versions, heavier than other models
Nike is not necessarily known for wider shoes. However, they made a few changes with the Air Zoom Pegasus 38 to create more room in the forefoot. This makes it a good budget shoe for people who need a slightly wider shoe. Another feature is the increase in foam, which means better cushioning without the bulk.
The regular size comes with a wider toe box, but Nike also offers this shoe in an extra-wide version. Plus, the Air Zoom Pegasus 38 has a deeper heel cup, which helps eliminate slippage.
Customers like the upgrades to this shoe, especially the wider toe box and deeper heel cup. Many say they do not have blisters anymore. However, many runners point out that these shoes are heavier than many other running shoes.
Price:  $$
Pros:  versatile and responsive, soft and plush feel, taller toe box, lightweight, zero heel-to-toe drop
Cons:  not recommended for serious runners, does not vent as well as previous versions
The Altra Escalante 2.5 delivers a comfortable ride with just the right responsiveness. Designed for walking, short runs, and light jogs, this basic trainer is a good fit for entry-level runners who are not planning on cranking out a ton of miles in one run.
The foot shape of the Escalante 2.5 gives your feet more space to sit naturally, which is a nice feature for people with wide feet. Plus, the lighter weight of this shoe makes it easy to wear all day.
Customers are happy with the space and support it provides, especially in the toe box. They also like how light this shoe is, coming in at 6.9 ounces for the women’s style and 8.5 ounces for the men’s.
Some reviewers express concern the shoe is not wide enough for people with really wide feet.
Price:  $$
Pros:  lightweight for a stability shoe, low heel-to-toe drop, designed for short and long runs
Cons:  limited color choices, Ortholite sockliner, might not be wide enough for really wide feet
Stability and comfort are what make the HOKA Arahi 6 an excellent choice for runners looking for a wide shoe for daily training. This shoe is designed to keep your ankles from rolling too far inward without forcing them too far outward, either. Plus, it provides maximum cushioning while still being stable at high running speeds.
Because it’s made for a smooth ride, the Arahi 6 is a solid choice whether you want a daily runner or a shoe that can take you through marathon training. Some updated features to this version include an extended pull tab at the heel, additional cushion on the tongue for added comfort, and a mesh upper to enhance breathability.
Reviews are fairly positive for the Arahi 6. Most people like the comfort and cushioning for longer runs. However, some customers feel the shoe is not wide enough and recommend sizing up.
Price:  $$$
Pros:  extra cushioning, versatile and works for most activities, unique style and design
Cons:  pricier than most other running shoes, heavier than other running shoes, limited color choices
Designed to handle both short and long distances, the Cloudstratus may be a good choice for serious runners looking for maximum comfort. It’s also a favorite of people who spend a lot of time on their feet at work. Reviews say the Cloudstratus provides nice balance, width, cushion, and spring for all-day wear.
Reviewers appreciate the support they get from this shoe during long runs. They also like its responsiveness and wider fit. Plus, many customers wear them for work and training.
However, some avid runners say they are a bit on the heavier and pricier side.

How to choose wide-foot running shoes
Here are some tips on how to choose a running shoe for wide feet.
Visit your local running shoe store or podiatrist and ask about a fitting.
A shoe department salesperson or podiatrist can measure your foot, watch you run, and possibly do a gait analysis to help determine the best shoe for your foot.
Generally, running shoe size is a half-size larger than your typical shoe size. When measuring, wear the socks you’ll use while running.
Your toes and forefoot sit in the front of the shoe, which is called the toe box.
If you have wide feet or issues with hammer toes or  metatarsalgia , which causes the ball of your foot to become inflamed, look for shoes with a wider toe box.
That said, a shoe with a generous toe box doesn’t guarantee a wide fit in the mid-foot or heel. If you need room everywhere, make sure the shoe is marked wide, 2E, 4E, or wider.
If you’re a trail runner, opt for a shoe designed specifically for that terrain. Similarly, if the pavement is your go-to terrain, look for a shoe built to withstand hard surfaces.
Orthotics  that slide into your shoes take up room and may require a different shoe size — even if you remove the existing insoles.
If you wear toe splints, toe wraps, toe separators, or any other product for  hammer toes , make sure you’re wearing them when trying on shoes.

Product comparison

How to choose the best running shoes for wide and flat feet
If you have wide and flat feet, finding shoes that fit right and feel comfortable might seem a bit like hunting for a needle in a haystack, but there are some good options available.
When searching for wide shoes, always look for indicators like D, 2E, 4E, wide, and extra-wide. Shoes designed for wide feet will note this on the box.
If you have flat feet from fallen arches, you’ll want to look for running shoes that provide arch support. In addition to shoes with arch support, you can also do  strengthening exercises  to help fallen arches.
People with flat feet often  overpronate  when walking or running. This means the foot rolls inward. If you notice this while walking or running, consider a shoe with stability as well.
If you’ve always had flat feet, you’re likely dealing with genetics. You may need to consult with a podiatrist to help you find the best shoes and fit.

What is heel-to-toe drop?
Heel-to-toe drop is an important feature when choosing a running shoe. The drop refers to the difference in cushioning between the heel and toe.
You will notice the heel-to-toe drop when your foot strikes the ground. In general, the average running shoe has a heel-to-toe drop of 10 millimeters (mm), which means your heel sits 10 mm higher than your toes.
If you find a shoe with a zero drop, this means you will feel the same amount of cushioning under the toes and the heels. Barefoot or minimalist shoes often have a zero heel-to-toe drop.
The lower drop is often better for people who want a midfoot or forefoot strike, while the higher drop encourages a rearfoot strike.

Frequently asked questions
When looking for a wide running shoe, the first thing to consider is your feet. If you tend to have a wide toe box but a narrow foot, you may not need a shoe that is wide throughout. Instead, a shoe that has a wide or roomy toe box might provide enough space.
However, if your foot is wide from the toes to the heel, you will need to look for a shoe that’s offered in wider widths. This may include 2E and 4E widths as well as wide, extra-wide, and D.
Shoes like New Balance, Asics, and Brooks offer numerical widths.
Each manufacturer has its own description for wide shoes. That’s why it’s best to go to a running shoe store for a proper fitting.
Several brands sell running shoes in both standard and wide widths. That said, these brands  often have a variety of wide shoes available for runners:
New Balance
HOKA
Asics
Brooks
On
Altra
Asics makes good running shoes for all foot types. For wide feet, the Asics GT-2000 10, which comes in 2E and 4E widths, is a solid choice.
The Asics Gel-Kayano 26 has a wide toe box, making it a good option for people with a wider forefoot. Additionally, the Gel-Nimbus, Gel-Contend, Jolt 3, and Gel-Excite all come in D width.

The bottom line
If you have wide feet, it’s critical to find a shoe that fits right and has plenty of room for your foot to spread out.  Wearing shoes that are too narrow  may cause pain, swelling, blisters, corns, and even infections.
When shopping for wide running shoes, consider factors like extended widths (wide, 2E, and 4E), cushioning, a roomy toe box for your toes and forefoot, and price.
To get the best fit, consider a professional fitting with a running shoe expert or podiatrist.

References:

https://www.healthline.com#overall
https://www.healthline.com#daily
https://www.healthline.com#orthotics
https://www.healthline.com#extra
https://www.healthline.com#trainer
https://www.healthline.com#support
https://www.healthline.com#light
https://www.healthline.com#trail
https://www.healthline.com#trail
https://www.healthline.com#budget
https://www.healthline.com#low
https://www.healthline.com#stability
https://www.healthline.com#versatility
https://www.healthline.com/health/metatarsalgia
https://www.healthline.com/health/bone-health/orthotics
https://www.healthline.com/health/hammer-toe
https://www.healthline.com/health/flat-feet-exercises
https://www.healthline.com/health/overpronation
https://www.healthline.com/health/shoes-too-tight
