Title: A Guide to Bodyweight Back Exercises

No gym? No problem. Bodyweight exercises are an excellent way to train your back muscles when your access to weights is limited or you’re looking for a way to change up your workouts.
Using your body weight as resistance means you can squeeze in a workout when time is tight. It also gives you a chance to focus on your form before adding weight via dumbbells, kettlebells, or machines.
Plus, bodyweight back exercises are convenient, affordable, and easy to modify for different fitness levels.
The 12 exercises detailed below target the upper, middle, and lower back muscles.

Muscle groups worked during bodyweight back exercises
Performing exercises that target the large and small back muscles can improve your  posture  and ease  low back pain . It can also boost sports performance and help you perform daily tasks ( 1 ).
Your back muscles are separated into two categories: extrinsic and intrinsic. The extrinsic muscles, which include the lats and traps, are likely more familiar to you and easier to identify than the intrinsic muscles, such as the interspinales and erector spinae ( 2 ).
And while memorizing anatomical names isn’t a prerequisite, it’s a nice way to familiarize yourself with the muscles you’re working when performing these exercises.
The extrinsic back muscles help move the upper limbs, scapula, and humerus. They also aid in rib movement and respiration.
trapezius
latissimus dorsi
levator scapulae
rhomboids (major and minor)
serratus posterior (superior and inferior)
The intrinsic back muscles act together to help maintain your posture and move the vertebral column.
splenius muscles
erector spinae (also known as the  paraspinal muscles )
transversospinal muscles ( semispinalis ,  multifidus , and  rotatores )
interspinales and intertransversarii muscles

How to perform bodyweight back exercises
To create a bodyweight back workout, you can choose two to three exercises from this list and add them to a full-body routine, or select five to six exercises to perform as a standalone back workout.
If you’re performing the moves as part of a back workout, do the recommended sets and reps and rest for 1 minute between exercises.
Although you’ll be using your body weight for resistance, you do need a few props to perform some of the moves.
More specifically, two exercises require an exercise band, two use a bar, and one uses a TRX suspension trainer or similar system.
Feel free to skip these exercises if you don’t have access to equipment — there are plenty of other moves that work the same muscle groups.
Before jumping into any workout, spend at least 5 minutes warming up. This should include light cardio to raise your heart rate and dynamic movements like arm circles.

Bodyweight back exercises you can do at home
This exercise targets the upper and lower back muscles, including the rhomboids, trapezius, and erector spinae. It also works your core, glutes, and shoulders.
Directions:
Lie facedown on the floor with your arms stretched out in front of you and your legs extended.
Pull the abdominals away from the floor toward your spine. Aim to maintain this abdominal connection as you move through the exercise.
Engage the back muscles and glutes to lift your arms and legs off the floor simultaneously.
Hold this position for 5 seconds, then return to the starting position.
Complete 3 sets of 12 reps.
Variations: To make this easier on your neck, you can widen your arms out in front to form a “Y,” or out to the sides to form a “T.”
This exercise targets the upper and mid-back muscles, including the latissimus dorsi, rhomboids, and levator scapulae. It also works the glutes, core, and shoulders.
Directions:
Lie facedown on an exercise mat with your legs extended, feet together, and arms by your sides — palms facing down.
Slightly lift your arms off the ground and bring them out to the side. Move through a wide arc overhead and back until your arms are at your sides, your hands are next to your legs, and your fingertips are pointing toward your feet.
Repeat this motion.
Complete 3 sets of 12 reps.
The prone pull works the upper and mid-back muscles, including the latissimus dorsi, rhomboids, levator scapulae, and trapezius. It also works the shoulders and arms.
Directions:
Lie facedown on an exercise mat with your legs extended and feet together.
Stretch your arms to the front — palms facing the floor but not touching.
Pull your elbows down toward your lower back and squeeze your shoulder blades together.
Return to the starting position and repeat.
Complete 3 sets of 12 reps.
This exercise strengthens the upper, middle, and lower back muscles, including the latissimus dorsi, rhomboids, trapezius, and erector spinae. It also works the core, glutes, and arms.
Directions:
Begin in a plank position with your hands flat on the floor and arms extended.
Engage your core and lift your right arm to perform a rowing motion. Pause at the top and return your right hand to the floor.
Repeat on the left side and alternate arms.
Do 2 sets, alternating arms for 30 seconds each time.
The banded row targets the upper and mid-back muscles, including the latissimus dorsi, rhomboids, and trapezius. It also works the arms and core.
Directions:
Loop a resistance band around a secure structure like a pole.
Stand tall facing the structure and hold one end of the band in each hand. Step back until you feel enough resistance.
Pull the band toward your torso in a rowing motion. Keep your elbows near your body. Pause and return to the starting position.
Complete 3 sets of 12 reps.
This band exercise targets the upper and mid-back muscles, including latissimus dorsi, rhomboids, and trapezius. It also works the shoulders and arms.
Directions:
Loop an exercise band around a bar or fixed point like a door frame. You should be able to grab the ends of the band when seated or kneeling.
Sit or kneel on a mat with your body upright, your core engaged, and a neutral spine. Kneel on one knee if kneeling on both is too difficult.
Grab each end of the exercise band and pull it straight down until your thumbs are next to your shoulders. Make sure to squeeze your shoulder blades back and downward.
Pause, then return to the starting position.
Do 3 sets of 12 reps.
The wide grip pullup targets the upper, middle, and lower back muscles, including the latissimus dorsi, trapezius, erector spinae, and rhomboids. It also works the shoulders, arms, and core.
Directions:
Stand underneath a pullup bar and reach up and grab it with each hand. Your grip should be wider than your body.
Looking straight ahead, pull your body up toward the bar using your back muscles. Pause, then slowly lower yourself to the original position.
Complete 5–15 reps or as many as you can perform. Do 2 sets.
The inverted row exercise will strengthen the upper and mid-back muscles, including the latissimus dorsi, rhomboids, and trapezius. It also works the arms and core.
You can use a Smith Machine, barbell in a squat rack, or fixed bar or railing.
Directions:
Set the bar to a height that allows your arms to fully extend when lying down.
Lie down on your back under the bar. Grab it with a wide overhand grip.
Engage the core muscles and glutes and pull your body to the bar. The bar will barely touch your chest at the top of the movement. Keep your heels in contact with the floor and ensure your body is in a straight line.
Lower to the starting position and repeat.
Do 3 sets of 10 reps.
To make this exercise more challenging, place your heels on an elevated surface.
The suspended row targets the upper and mid-back muscles, including the latissimus dorsi, rhomboids, and trapezius. It also works the shoulders, biceps, and core.
Directions:
Stand facing a TRX suspension or similar system and grab both handles in an overhand grip. Your elbows should be bent and the handles at chest height.
Lean back until your arms are fully extended. Keep your feet planted on the floor.
Contract your upper back, biceps, and core muscles to pull yourself up.
Pause, then straighten your arms and lean back to repeat.
Do 3 sets of 12 reps.
When using suspension trainers, keeping your body at more of a vertical angle will make the exercise easier. Completing the exercise at a more horizontal angle will be harder — the closer you are to horizontal, the more challenging it will be.
Bird dog is a popular exercise that works the upper, middle, and lower back muscles, including the erector spinae, latissimus dorsi, and trapezius. It also trains the glutes, core, and shoulders.
Directions:
Start on all fours with your knees under your hips and your hands beneath your shoulders.
Engage your core muscles and extend your right leg behind and your left arm in front. Aim to lift your arm and leg no higher than parallel to the floor so that you avoid arching your low back.
Pause, engage your glutes and core, and then slowly lower your arm and leg to the starting position.
Repeat on the other side. Extend your left leg behind you while extending the right arm in front. Pause and return to the starting position.
Do 2 sets of 10 reps on each side.
Your upper, middle, and lower back muscles are all trained with the cobra, including the latissimus dorsi, trapezius, and erector spinae. It also works the glutes, core, shoulders, and arms.
Directions:
Lie facedown on a yoga mat with your hands placed beside your ribs.
Contract your glutes and hamstrings to engage the back of your legs, without lifting your feet. Meanwhile, tighten your abdominal wall to gently draw your belly button in toward your spine.
Push into your hands to lift your torso off the floor. Your arms will be extended.
Do 2 sets, holding each for 20–30 seconds.
This exercise targets the lower back muscle — erector spinae. It also works the glutes and core.
Directions:
Stand with your feet about hip-width apart. Place your hands behind your head, so your elbows are open wide. Alternately, if you have a barbell, you can hold it across your shoulders.
Pull your abdominal muscles toward your spine. Move your buttocks back and begin to hinge at the hips until your back is close to parallel. Your knees will be slightly bent.
Pause, then return to the starting position. Contract your glutes at the top.
Complete 3 sets of 12 reps.

The bottom line
Adding bodyweight back exercises to an overall workout routine is simple, affordable, and convenient. The back exercises included in this guide target the upper, middle, and lower back muscles while also working other areas like the glutes, core, and shoulders.
Remember to start slowly and focus on your form. If you have any questions about how to perform any of these moves, consult a physical therapist or certified personal trainer.
Additionally, if you experience any pain or discomfort while doing these exercises, stop and take a break. You can always try it again another day. However, if the pain persists, call your healthcare provider for further assistance.
Keeping your back muscles strong is an important step to maintaining great posture and preventing injury. Stand tall and proud — you’re on your way!

References:

https://www.healthline.com/health/posture-exercises
https://www.healthline.com/health/low-back-pain-acute
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5721192/
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK525969/
https://www.healthline.com/human-body-maps/trapezius-muscle#1
https://www.healthline.com/human-body-maps/latissimus-dorsi-muscle
https://www.healthline.com/human-body-maps/levator-scapulae-muscle#1
https://www.healthline.com/human-body-maps/rhomboid-major-muscle#1
https://www.healthline.com/human-body-maps/serratus-posterior-inferior-muscle#1
https://www.healthline.com/human-body-maps/splenius-muscle#1
https://www.healthline.com/health/paraspinal-muscles
https://www.healthline.com/human-body-maps/semispinalis-muscle#1
https://www.healthline.com/human-body-maps/multifidus-muscle#1
https://www.healthline.com/human-body-maps/rotatores-muscle
