Title: Medi-Weightloss Review: Does It Work?


Healthline diet score: 2.25 out of 5
The Medi-Weightloss Program is a plan designed to help you lose weight and keep it off long-term.
The company has more than 90 locations throughout the United States, and the program has quickly become one of the most popular physician-supervised weight loss programs in the country.
However, despite its widespread success, some claim the program is overly restrictive, expensive, and difficult to follow.
This article takes a look at the Medi-Weightloss diet, including what it is, how it works, and whether it’s actually effective for weight loss.
Overall score:  2.25/5
Weight loss:  2
Healthy eating:  2
Sustainability:  2.5
Whole body health:  2
Nutrition quality:  3
Evidence based:  2
BOTTOM LINE: The Medi-Weightloss Program provides personalized guidance for long-term weight loss.
However, it’s very low in calories and thus quite restrictive. It’s also higher cost, yet there is limited research on the effectiveness of this diet specifically. The program also recommends branded supplements you may not need that add to the cost.

What is it?
The Medi-Weightloss Program is a high protein, low carb diet plan designed to promote long lasting weight loss.
It was originally created in 2005 by entrepreneur Edward Kaloust. The company claims the program has helped more than 300,000 people around the country lose a total of 7.5 million pounds.
According to the company’s website, the program can help you lose up to 20 pounds in your first month by creating an individualized plan tailored to your needs.
The plan pairs a  low carb, high protein diet  with weekly check-ins at one of the company’s clinics.
It may also involve using supplements, prescription medications, or nutrient injections under the guidance of a Medi-Weightloss healthcare professional.
The company also offers several other programs for certain populations, including the Medi-Weightloss:
Adolescent Program
Corporate Wellness Program
Preventive Medicine Program for those with specific health conditions
The Medi-Weightloss Program is a high protein, low carb diet plan. To follow it, you have to attend regular check-ins at a Medi-Weightloss clinic. It may also involve the use of supplements, prescription medications, or injections.

How it works
The Medi-Weightloss Program starts with an initial consultation with a medical professional at one of the company’s clinics.
During your consultation, the professional will collect information about your health history and may ask you to go through several tests, such as a blood panel or body composition analysis.
The medical professional will use this information to create a custom diet and exercise plan for you. Depending on your needs, they may also prescribe medications, supplements, or nutrient injections.
The program also offers convenient packaged meals as part of its Medi-Weightloss Signature Menu, which you can purchase for an additional fee.
The program is divided into three consecutive stages:
acute weight loss phase
short-term maintenance phase
wellness phase
In the acute weight loss phase, you eat mostly high protein foods and limit carbohydrates to help your body enter  ketosis , a metabolic state in which you burn fat for fuel instead of carbs ( 1 ).
Calorie recommendations aren’t available on the Medi-Weightloss website, perhaps because the company’s medical counselors tailor their recommendations to individuals’ needs and goals.
However, it’s important to keep in mind that not eating enough calories can lead to  adverse effects .
Unlike other diet plans, the Medi-Weightloss Program doesn’t require you to log the number of overall calories or carbohydrates you consume during this phase.
Instead, you should track the number of calories you eat only from  protein foods , as well as the number of servings you eat of healthy fats, fruits, vegetables, and other foods.
Once you get closer to your weight loss goal, you progress into the short-term maintenance phase, which allows you to slowly increase the number of calories and carbohydrates you consume each day.
Generally, you’ll continue going to weekly check-ins at a Medi-Weightloss clinic because a medical professional may need to make minor adjustments to your diet and protein intake.
The final part of the program is the wellness phase, which begins once you meet your weight loss goal.
During the wellness phase, you’ll likely need less frequent clinic check-ins. You can also increase your intake of calories and carbohydrates.
For most people, the Medi-Weightloss Program recommends transitioning to a 40/30/30 plan, which is made up of about:
40% of total daily calories from carbohydrates
30% from  healthy fats
30% from protein
The Medi-Weightloss Program is a low carb, high protein diet that’s divided into three phases. It involves undergoing an initial consultation with a medical professional and going to regular check-ins at one of the company’s clinics.

Foods to eat and avoid
The Medi-Weightloss Program provides comprehensive guidelines for which foods you should eat and avoid while following the diet.
The exact guidelines for which foods you should eat vary depending on which phase of the program you are in.
However, the program typically involves eating plenty of fruits, non-starchy vegetables, heart-healthy fats, and lean protein sources.
Since the initial acute weight loss phase of the program is meant to get you to enter ketosis, you may have to reduce your intake of high carb foods.
Here are some foods the diet recommends:
Fruits:  apples, oranges, berries, kiwi, pears, peaches, plums
Non-starchy vegetables:  broccoli, cauliflower, zucchini, spinach, kale, tomatoes
Proteins:  lean cuts of beef and pork, skinless poultry, seafood, eggs, tofu,  tempeh
Nuts:  almonds, walnuts, macadamia nuts, pistachios, cashews
Seeds:  hemp seeds, chia seeds, flaxseed, sunflower seeds
Cooking oils:   olive oil , coconut oil, vegetable oil
Beverages:  water, coffee, unsweetened tea
Some foods that are higher in carbohydrates are also permitted in moderation, including:
Dairy products:  milk, cheese, yogurt, butter
Whole grains:  quinoa, brown rice, oats, farro
Starchy vegetables:   potatoes , corn, peas, beets, yam, parsnips
Legumes:  black beans, chickpeas, kidney beans, lentils
On the Medi-Weightloss Program, you should limit foods that are highly processed or rich in carbohydrates or  added sugar .
Here are some foods you may need to limit on the diet:
Processed foods:  fast food, convenience meals, fried foods, chips, pretzels
Refined carbs:  white pasta, white bread, crackers
Sweets:  baked goods, cookies, cakes, candies
Beverages:  soda, juice, sweet tea, energy drinks, sports drinks
Sugar:  white sugar, brown sugar, maple syrup, honey
The Medi-Weightloss Program generally involves eating plenty of fruits, vegetables, and proteins while limiting processed and refined foods high in carbohydrates or sugar.

Does it work for weight loss?
According to a 2020 study, people following the Medi-Weightloss Program lost an average of 21% of their body weight after 39 weeks. They also experienced significant reductions in body fat and belly fat throughout the program ( 2 ).
However, keep in mind that this study was funded by Medi-Weightloss and the researchers were employed by the company. Thus, these results may be biased.
While there is no other peer-reviewed research available on the effects of this diet specifically, studies show that similar eating patterns may be effective for weight loss.
For instance, multiple studies have found that  low carb diets  can increase weight loss and reduce body fat ( 3 ,  4 ,  5 ).
Other research shows that increasing your intake of  protein  can enhance feelings of fullness, reduce your appetite, and change body composition ( 6 ).
The plan also involves regular check-ins and counseling from a medical professional.
Not only can this help keep you accountable by providing extra support and guidance, but some studies also show that this could be beneficial for weight loss ( 7 ,  8 ).
One study funded by Medi-Weightloss found that the diet helped promote weight loss and fat loss. Other research shows that similar eating patterns may be beneficial for weight loss.

Other benefits
In addition to its potential for helping with  weight loss , the Medi-Weightloss Program may offer several other benefits.
First of all, the program is tailored to your needs and includes personalized guidance from a healthcare professional along with detailed resources like shopping lists, recipes, and workout plans.
For people who have underlying health conditions or food allergies or take medications, this may be a better fit than a one-size-fits-all diet plan that doesn’t take your individual needs into account.
It also enables a healthcare professional to offer support and adjust your plan as needed, which can set you up for long-term success.
Additionally, the plan is split into several phases, which may be a good fit for those who prefer a more structured program.
It also eases your transition into the final phase, or wellness phase, and allows you to stay in this phase for as long as you want to help you maintain your weight loss over time.
The Medi-Weightloss Program is tailored to your needs and includes individualized guidance from a medical professional. It is also split into several phases and includes a final phase that supports long-term weight maintenance.

Potential downsides
There are several downsides to consider when determining whether Medi-Weightloss is right for you.
For starters, there’s very little research on the program specifically, apart from studies funded directly by the company.
Second, Medi-Weightloss supplements contain herbs, including hoodia, guarana, and  Gymnema sylvestre , that may interact with medications and lead to side effects. Most people would probably find these supplements unnecessary.
Furthermore, the plan can be very restrictive and difficult to follow, especially during the initial weight loss phase.
Because many  foods high in carbohydrates  are limited, eating at restaurants or in social settings may also be challenging, which can make the diet more difficult to stick to long-term.
Although prices can vary depending on which clinic you go to, Medi-Weightloss programs can also be very expensive.
For example, prices for the initial consultation typically range from $250–300, and check-ins cost an additional $75–100 per week. This is significantly more pricey than other popular diet programs, such as WW (formerly Weight Watchers) or Noom.
In contrast, most health insurance policies cover medical nutrition therapy with a dietitian. This is a much more affordable way to get personalized weight loss therapy.
If you purchase any packaged foods, supplements, or medications along with the program, the total price will increase further.
Finally, keep in mind that the program requires weekly or monthly check-ins at one of the 90 Medi-Weightloss clinics around the country. Therefore, the program may not be ideal for those who don’t live near a clinic.
The Medi-Weightloss Program is restrictive and may be more expensive than other diet plans. There is also limited research on the effectiveness of this diet specifically.

Sample meal plan
Your specific diet plan can vary based on your nutritional needs, your weight loss goals, and which phase of the program you’re in.
Here is a 3-day sample meal plan to give you an idea of what your menu may look like during the initial acute weight loss phase of the program.
Breakfast:  omelet with mushrooms, tomatoes, and bell peppers
Lunch:  garlic baked salmon with asparagus
Dinner:  salad with grilled chicken, tomatoes, hard-boiled eggs, cucumbers, and avocado
Snacks:  apple slices with peanut butter
Breakfast:  smoothie with almond milk, protein powder, flaxseed, spinach, and berries
Lunch:  tofu stir-fry with peppers, broccoli, green beans, and ginger
Dinner:  beef and cabbage soup with veggie side salad
Snacks:  turkey roll-ups with tomatoes and lettuce
Breakfast:  scrambled eggs with garlic and kale
Lunch:  baked pork chops with  cauliflower rice  and broccoli
Dinner:  lemon pepper chicken with sautéed Brussels sprouts
Snacks:  chia pudding with fresh fruit
The sample meal plan above provides a few ideas for meals and snacks you can enjoy during the first phase of the program.

The bottom line
The Medi-Weightloss Program is a low carb, high protein eating plan that provides personalized guidance from a medical professional at one of the company’s clinics.
Although there’s limited research on the effectiveness of the program specifically, some studies suggest that similar diet patterns may be beneficial for weight loss.
However, it can be somewhat restrictive and difficult to follow. It’s also more expensive than other popular plans, which may not be a good fit for everyone.

References:

https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/high-protein-low-carb-diet
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/what-is-ketosis
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK499830/
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/calorie-restriction-risks
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/20-delicious-high-protein-foods
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/10-super-healthy-high-fat-foods
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/tempeh
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/11-proven-benefits-of-olive-oil
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/benefits-of-potatoes
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/too-much-sugar
https://www.healthline.comhttps://academic.oup.com/jpubhealth/article/42/4/828/5678729
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/low-carb-diet-meal-plan-and-menu
https://www.healthline.comhttps://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33317019/
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6368026/
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7399204/
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/10-reasons-to-eat-more-protein
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6179508/
https://www.healthline.comhttps://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30891688/
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4990387/
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/how-to-lose-weight-as-fast-as-possible
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/14-foods-to-avoid-on-low-carb
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/cauliflower-rice-calories
