Title: ButcherBox Review: A Dietitian’s Expert Take

ButcherBox is a subscription service for fresh, high quality cuts of meat, fish, and poultry.
With various plans and subscription options available, ButcherBox is particularly popular among people seeking a convenient way to order premium meats in bulk or to add more protein variety to their diet.
Still, you may wonder whether it’s worth the cost.
This article reviews ButcherBox, including how it works, who should try it, and how it stacks up against its competitors.

Basics
ButcherBox is a subscription service that delivers a variety of 100% grass-fed cuts of meat, wild-caught and sustainably sourced seafood, free-range and organic poultry, and more straight to your home.
The contents of each order are delivered frozen to ensure food safety and quality.
The company is also a  Certified B Corporation , which means it adheres to specific standards for environmental, social, and business practices.
When placing your order, you can easily choose the types of meat and box size you’d like to receive.
The custom plan also allows you to select the specific cuts or preparations of meat that you prefer for each order, such as ground beef or pork, chicken drumsticks, breakfast  sausage , bacon, and beef or salmon burgers.
You can receive a box every 2, 4, 6, or 8 weeks and adjust your order frequency online.

Pros and cons at a glance

Who tried it

Subscription options
ButcherBox has several plans to choose from, including:
Custom box:  your choice of beef, chicken, pork, and wild-caught seafood
Mixed box:  assorted cuts of beef, chicken, and pork
Beef and pork:  assorted cuts of these two meats, such as ground beef, sirloin steaks, and tenderloin
Beef and chicken:  assorted cuts of these two meats, such as drumsticks, chicken breast, and strip steaks
All beef:  assorted cuts of beef, such as steak tips, chuck roast, and sirloin steaks
When ordering a Custom Box, you choose the types and cuts you’d like. When ordering a Curated Box, the types and cuts of protein are chosen for you.
Within each plan, you can also choose either the classic or big box. For Custom Boxes, the classic and big options are slightly larger.
For most plans, the classic box includes 8–11 pounds (lbs.) (3.6–5 kg) of meat, while the big box contains 16–22 lbs. (7.3–10 kg). Custom orders include either 9–14 lbs. (4–6.4 kg) or 18–26 lbs. (8.2–11.8 kg) in the classic and big boxes, respectively.
In addition to the meats included in your box, you can order add-ons for an extra fee, including packs of  salmon , ground beef, and breakfast sausage.

How it works
To begin the process, you’ll choose your plan: basic, curated, or custom. You’ll then select the box size you’d like to receive: classic or big.
If you choose a custom plan, you’ll select your proteins and cuts next. Once you click the “add” button, the items will be added to your cart and you’ll receive a notification on the side of the screen that tells you how many selections you have left.
If you choose a curated plan, you’ll select the types of protein but not the cuts. You can choose from the options “beef, pork, and chicken,” “chicken and beef,” “beef and pork,” and “all beef.”
With the basic box, you’ll have the option to select add-ons such as burgers, sausages, or ground beef.
Shipments are automatically set to arrive every 4 weeks, but you can make changes at any time before your billing date. You can change the shipping frequency to every 2, 4, 6, or 8 weeks.

Pricing
Prices for ButcherBox are determined by your specific plan and box size.
For most plans, the classic box costs $146, while the big box costs $269. These boxes provide approximately 24 or 48 meals each, respectively.
The custom plan, which includes slightly more meat and allows you to select the cuts you receive, costs $169 for a classic box or $306 for a big box.
Add-ons, such as packs of salmon, beef,  bacon , or sausage, are available for an extra fee.
ButcherBox offers free shipping on all orders, regardless of the plan you choose.

Sustainable packaging and materials
To  promote sustainability  and minimize waste, ButcherBox uses eco-friendly packaging to deliver orders.
In fact, all orders are shipped in boxes that are fully recyclable and made from recyclable materials.
Instead of insulated bags, the company now uses boxes with built-in insulation — with or without dry ice — to ensure that food remains cool during transit.
Proteins come in plastic bags or sealed in plastic, but most of the packaging isn’t excessive.
All items arrive frozen with dry ice.

Types of meat included with ButcherBox
ButcherBox provides a variety of high quality ingredients, including the following items.
Grass-fed beef  contains a higher concentration of omega-3 fatty acids than beef that is not grass-fed. Omega-3s help lower inflammation and protect against chronic diseases ( 1 ,  2 ).
ButcherBox has an all-beef box option that can include selections such as:
2 lbs. (0.9 kg) of ground beef
2 New York strip steaks
1 lb. (0.5 kg) of premium steak tips
2 lbs. (0.9 kg) of chuck roast
4 top sirloin steaks
I thawed the top sirloins and then grilled them. Here’s how they turned out:
Chicken raised free-range live partly or completely outside. Studies show that unlimited outdoor access may improve both the meat quality and nutritional value of chicken ( 3 ,  4 ,  5 ).
Chicken can be ordered as part of a custom box, a beef and chicken box, or a mixed box. One of these boxes may include items like:
3 lbs. (1.4 kg) of drumsticks
3 lbs. (1.4 kg) of boneless, skinless chicken breast
2 lbs. (0.9 kg) of ground beef
2 New York strip steaks
4 top sirloin steaks
I thawed the chicken thighs overnight in the fridge and then turned them into pulled chicken in my Instant Pot with great success.
This type of pork includes many traditional breeds, which are often favored by meat lovers for their rich flavors. Pork is included in the pork and beef box and mixed box, and it can also be included in custom boxes. Boxes may include items such as:
1 lb. (0.5 kg) of whole pork tenderloin
4 boneless pork chops
2 lbs. (0.9 kg) of ground beef
2 New York strip steaks
4 top sirloin steaks
Many people prefer  wild-caught seafood  because it may contain smaller amounts of pollutants and contaminants than farmed seafood ( 6 ).
ButcherBox offers a few seafood options, including:
wild-caught salmon
wild-caught cod
wild-caught scallops
wild-caught lobster
wild-caught halibut
ButcherBox offers a salmon box that includes 10 lbs. (4.5 kg) of individually packaged salmon filets, as well as other seafood options like salmon burgers in the custom and mixed boxes.
The salmon burgers can be cooked from frozen for an easy weeknight dinner, requiring only a short time on the grill. While I appreciated this quick option, the flavor and texture weren’t as good as those of other salmon burgers I’ve tried.
All products are humanely raised and free of added hormones and antibiotics. What’s more, ButcherBox partners with suppliers that adhere to strict animal welfare standards and fair labor practices.

Taste and freshness
ButcherBox offers a range of fresh and frozen cuts of meat, fish, and poultry.
Many of the items are considered high quality, including grass-fed beef,  organic  chicken, heritage-breed pork, and wild-caught seafood.
The custom box allows you to choose 6–12 cuts of meat, fish, and poultry per order, making it easy to tailor each box to your needs.
After slaughter, the meat is flash-frozen, packaged, shipped to distribution centers, and delivered. The company says that in order to maximize freshness and quality, meats are never kept on shelves for any period of time.
The foods are shipped to customers in insulated boxes to keep them fresh during transit.
It’s best to refrigerate or freeze your meats within 6–8 hours of delivery.

Overall thoughts
ButcherBox comes with some of the best eco-friendly packaging for frozen foods that I’ve seen. I was also impressed that every item in the box arrived completely frozen, with no evidence of thawing.
The food was clearly labeled and had minimal plastic packaging.
The labels provide some information on freezing and thawing, but the ButcherBox blog,  JustCook. , provides more details.
I tried a few of the chicken, beef, and seafood options, and found them to be on par with the proteins I purchase from my local grocery store. The quality of most items felt identical.
The only somewhat unsuccessful item was the ground pork sausage. The flavor was great, but the texture didn’t work well for shaping into patties and baking. Perhaps it would be best for pan-frying or turning into sausage gravy.
I think it would be helpful to add recipe cards with thawing information to the boxes, as well as some simple cooking instructions, especially for people who don’t have a lot of experience cooking some of these proteins or don’t want to spend time researching recipes.
With free shipping and recurring deliveries, ButcherBox is a convenient way to get fresh meat delivered directly to your door. However, it may not be for everyone.
Who ButcherBox may work best for:
Those who eat meat often:  ButcherBox may be an especially good option if you regularly eat meat and want to order in bulk or experiment with new cuts and varieties.
Those who prefer higher quality meats:  ButcherBox is ideal for people who prefer high quality proteins, including grass-fed beef,  free-range chicken , and wild-caught seafood. This is especially helpful if you live in an area in which these options aren’t readily available.
Those who could benefit from grocery delivery:  If you are busy, work long hours, or could use assistance with grocery shopping, ButcherBox may be helpful for you.
However, ButcherBox may not be for everyone. Keep in mind that:
It can be costly:  ButcherBox meats may be slightly more expensive than conventional cuts at your local grocery store or butcher shop. Therefore, this service may not be the best choice for those who are on a  tight budget  or don’t regularly eat meat.
You may not get what you wanted in your box:  Unless you choose the custom meal plan, it’s unlikely that you’ll know the exact cuts of meat you’ll be getting. So if you have recipes that require a specific cut of meat, this service may not be your best option.
Buying high quality meat elsewhere may be more convenient:  If you can get grass-fed, free-range, or sustainably sourced meat from your local grocery store, it may be more cost- and time-efficient to do your shopping there.

How do customers feel about Butcher Box?
ButcherBox is a  Better Business Bureau  Accredited Business and has an A+ rating and more than 1,200 reviews. Customers give the company 4.51 stars out of 5.
While most customers seem satisfied with the quality of ButcherBox, a few mention that the plastic packaging on the meats has been cracked or broken or that they’ve had delivery issues.
Most customer complaints mention charges for orders that weren’t delivered or difficulties with canceling subscriptions.

How ButcherBox compares with competitors
Several other meat subscription services compete with ButcherBox.
For example, Crowd Cow lets you build your own box with several types of meat, poultry, and seafood. Unlike ButcherBox, this company allows you to customize your order regardless of the plan you select.
However, to qualify for free shipping, you must spend at least $125 (if you’re a member) or $150 (if you’re not a member).
Crowd Cow stocks meats that are often considered lower in quality, such as farm-raised seafood and grain-fed beef. Its items are also ordered individually rather than in bulk.
Moink Box is another similar service that provides curated boxes of ethically sourced meat. The company offers small or medium boxes, with or without  pork , both for $159.
Like ButcherBox, Moink Box delivers grass-fed beef, wild-caught salmon, and pasture-raised pork and chicken.
However, Moink Box lets you request specific items to customize your order. While ButcherBox allows you to select add-ons with any box, only the custom box allows you to choose specific cuts of meat.

Frequently asked questions about ButcherBox
The average cost for the Curated Classic Box (8–11 lbs./3.6–5 kg of meat) is $146, and the average cost for the larger Curated Big Box (16–22 lbs./7.3–10 kg of meat) is $269.
The Custom boxes cost a bit more, with the Classic Box (9–14 lbs./4–6.4 kg of meat) averaging $169 and the Big Box (18–26 lbs./8.2–11.8 kg of meat) coming in around $306.
If you frequently consume animal proteins, then ButcherBox might be a good option. Because all the proteins come frozen, you can easily plan meals ahead of time or even create last-minute meals if you cook the proteins while they’re still frozen.
The local grocery store might be a better option if you don’t have extra space in your freezer. The minimum weight you can order is 8 lbs. (3.6 kg), so it may not be practical for smaller freezers.
Quality might not match price in some cases, but that can be subjective.
All of the meat and seafood is delivered frozen. If you need directions on thawing, the blog on the ButcherBox website provides some instructions. Many of the products can also be cooked while still frozen.
Keep in mind that cooking from frozen will increase total cooking time, and it’s important to ensure that all meat, poultry, and seafood is fully cooked. You can determine whether your protein is properly cooked by checking its  internal temperature .

The bottom line
ButcherBox is a  grocery delivery service  that provides high quality meats, poultry, and seafood.
The company offers several boxes and sizes, making it easy to pick a plan that works for you.
If you favor high quality cuts of meat and are looking to order in bulk, ButcherBox may be worth a try.

References:

https://www.bcorporation.net/en-us/standards
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/carbs-in-sausage
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/11-benefits-of-salmon
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/is-bacon-bad-or-good
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/how-to-reduce-carbon-footprint
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/grass-fed-vs-grain-fed-beef
https://www.healthline.comhttps://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35028571/
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK564314/
https://www.fsis.usda.gov/food-safety/safe-food-handling-and-preparation/food-safety-basics/meat-and-poultry-labeling-terms
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6025111/
https://www.healthline.comhttps://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26769274/
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/wild-vs-farmed-salmon
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6550187/
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/what-is-organic-food
https://www.healthline.comhttps://justcook.butcherbox.com/recipes/
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/free-range-chicken
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/19-ways-to-eat-healthy-on-a-budget
https://www.bbb.org/us/ma/boston/profile/food-and-beverage-services/butcherbox-llc-0021-186401
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/is-pork-bad
https://www.fsis.usda.gov/food-safety/safe-food-handling-and-preparation/food-safety-basics/safe-temperature-chart
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/best-grocery-delivery
