Title: Grass-Fed vs. Grain-Fed Beef — What’s the Difference?

Grass-fed beef comes from cows that eat mostly grass. Most U.S. cows are forced to eat unnatural diets made from corn and soy, which fattens them quickly — this artificial diet affects the taste of the beef.
The way cows are fed can have a major effect on the nutrient composition of their beef.
Whereas cattle today are often fed grains, the animals people ate throughout evolution roamed free and ate grass.
Many studies have shown that the nutrients in beef can vary depending on what cows eat.
Where beef is mass-produced, such as in the United States, cattle are usually fed grain. However, grass-fed beef is common in many other countries, such as Australia.
You may wonder whether the way cows are fed makes any difference to your health.
This article looks at the evidence to determine the differences between grass- and grain-fed beef.

The difference between grass- and grain-fed cattle
In the United States, most cows start living similar lives.
The calves are born in the early spring, drink milk from their mothers, and are then allowed to roam free and eat grass or other edible plants they find in their environment.
This continues for about 7–9 months. After that, most conventionally raised cows are moved to feedlots.
Large feedlots are called concentrated animal feeding operations (CAFOs). There, the cows are kept in confined stalls, often with limited space.
They are rapidly fattened with grain-based feeds that are usually made from a base of soy or corn. Typically, their diet is also supplemented with small amounts of dried grass.
The cows live in these feedlots for a few months before being brought to a slaughterhouse.
Of course, it’s not that simple. The different feeding practices are complicated and varied.
For example, grass-fed beef in Australia may not be directly comparable to US products, and grass-fed beef isn’t necessarily pasture-raised. Not all grass-fed cows can graze outdoors.
In fact, the term grass-fed isn’t clearly defined.
That said, grass-fed cows eat (mostly) grass, while grain-fed cows eat (mostly) an unnatural diet based on corn and soy during the latter part of their lives.
To maximize growth, the cows are often given drugs, such as  antibiotics  and growth hormones.
As of January 1st, 2017, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) passed new legislation known as the Veterinary Feed Directive.
According to this legislation, antibiotics that are considered important in human medicine need to be administered under the oversight of a licensed veterinarian and cannot be used for growth promotion ( 1 ).
Most cows start on a pasture, drinking milk and eating grass. However, conventionally raised cows are later moved to feedlots and fed mainly grain-based feeds.

Differences in fatty acid composition
“You are what you eat” applies to cows, too.
What a cow eats can significantly affect the nutrient composition of its beef. This is particularly evident when it comes to fatty acid composition.
Grass-fed beef usually contains less total fat than grain-fed beef, which means that gram for gram, grass-fed beef contains fewer calories ( 2 ).
However, the composition of fatty acids is also different:
Monounsaturated fat.  Grass-fed beef contains much less  monounsaturated fat  than grain-fed beef ( 2 ).
Omega-6 polyunsaturated fats.  Grass- and grain-fed beef contain very similar amounts of omega-6 fatty acids.
Omega-3s.  This is where grass-fed makes a major difference, containing up to five times as much  omega-3  ( 3 ).
Conjugated linoleic acid (CLA).  Grass-fed beef contains about twice as much  CLA  as grain-fed beef. This fatty acid is associated with a few health benefits ( 4 ,  5 ).
In short, there are some significant differences in the composition and amount of fat in grass- and grain-fed beef.
Moreover, the breed and cut of meat considerably affect the fat composition of beef ( 2 ).
Grass-fed beef may contain less total fat than grain-fed beef, but a lot more omega-3 fatty acids and CLA, which are both linked to health benefits.

Grass-fed beef is more nutritious
Both grain- and grass-fed beef are highly concentrated sources of nutrients.
Beef is loaded with vitamin B12, B3, and B6. It’s also rich in highly bioavailable iron, selenium, and zinc. In fact, meat contains almost every nutrient that you need to survive ( 6 ).
It also contains high quality protein and various lesser-known nutrients, such as  creatine  and carnosine, which are very important for your muscles and brain.
But even though the difference isn’t great, grass-fed beef generally contains higher amounts of certain nutrients.
Compared with grain-fed beef, grass-fed is much higher in the following vitamins:
Vitamin A.  Grass-fed beef contains carotenoid precursors to vitamin A, such as beta carotene.
Vitamin E.  This antioxidant sits in your cell membranes and protects them from oxidation ( 4 ).
Grass-fed beef also tends to be richer in other antioxidants ( 7 ,  8 ).
Conventional grain-fed beef is highly nutritious, but grass-fed beef contains more carotenoids, vitamin E, and other antioxidants.

Is grass-fed beef worth the extra cost and potential inconvenience?
It’s important to keep in mind that even conventional, grain-fed beef is very nutritious.
As long as you  don’t overcook your beef , which can lead to the formation of harmful compounds, it’s a nutritious food that can be part of a healthy diet.
In the United States, grass-fed beef can be more expensive, and it may not be worth the extra cost for some people.
Depending on where you live, it may also be inconvenient to buy grass-fed beef.
While some people may live close to a farmer’s market or whole foods store, others may need to drive long distances to find grass-fed beef.
There can also be subtle differences in taste. Grass-fed beef is often leaner and may have a different texture.
Even though grass-fed beef contains higher amounts of certain nutrients, there is currently no compelling evidence that it’s significantly healthier than grain-fed beef in the context of a balanced diet.
In the end, the choice depends on your preferences and ideals. Some people prefer grass-fed, while others prefer grain-fed. Try both and see which one you like better.
Although grass and grain-fed beef differ in several nutrients, their effects on your health may be similar.

The bottom line
Despite all the controversies in the field of nutrition, most people agree that the most important thing is to  eat real food .
Some people like to take this idea a step further and only eat real food that eats real food. After all, grasses and herbs are a more natural diet for cows than corn and soy.
At the end of the day, the choice depends on your preferences and values.

References:

https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/antibiotics-in-your-food
https://www.fda.gov/animal-veterinary/development-approval-process/veterinary-feed-directive-vfd
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24018274
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/monounsaturated-fats
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24018274
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/17-health-benefits-of-omega-3
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20807460
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/conjugated-linoleic-acid
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20219103
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17490954
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24018274
https://www.healthline.comhttps://fdc.nal.usda.gov/fdc-app.html#/food-details/172161/nutrients
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/what-is-creatine
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20219103
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22063662
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22061512
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/healthiest-way-to-cook-meat
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/50-super-healthy-foods
