Title: Girl Scout Cookies: Which Ones Are Vegan?

If you’re hankering for the chocolatey, minty, or peanut-buttery goodness of Girl Scout Cookies, you’re not alone.
Yet, if you’re vegan, you may wonder whether they’re safe to eat.
These treats sold by Girl Scouts of America troops come in several varieties, the most popular of which include Thin Mints and Caramel deLites. As each type of cookie has a different recipe, some contain non-vegan ingredients like dairy or eggs — while others don’t.
This article explains which Girl Scout Cookies are vegan.

List of vegan Girl Scout Cookies
It’s important to note that Girl Scouts of America sources their cookies from different suppliers, so you’ll need to pay attention to the particular manufacturer if you want vegan cookies.
This information should be available when you order, as well as on the box. However, a vegan supplier may not be available in your location.
Here are the Girl Scout cookies that are currently  vegan  ( 1 ):
Lemonades:  from ABC Bakers
Peanut Butter Patties:  from ABC Bakers
Thanks-A-Lot:  from ABC Bakers
Girl Scout S’mores:  only the chocolate-coated variety, which comes from ABC Bakers
Thin Mints:  all suppliers
Keep in mind that similar versions of the first four cookies on this list, which may use slightly different names, come from different bakeries and aren’t vegan.
Today, ABC Bakers is the only company that makes more than one vegan cookie for Girl Scouts of America — though Thin Mints are always vegan regardless of the manufacturer ( 1 ).
If you’re only concerned about particular ingredients,  read the ingredient list  before purchasing.
Vegan Girl Scout Cookies currently include Lemonades, Peanut Butter Patties, Thanks-A-Lot, Thin Mints, and Girl Scout S’mores (only the ABC Bakers variety). Other manufacturers may produce similar versions that aren’t vegan.

Which Girl Scout Cookies aren’t vegan?
Several varieties of Girl Scout cookies aren’t vegan, as they contain  animal products like milk and eggs .
Non-vegan cookies include ( 1 ):
Lemon-Ups:  similar to Lemonades, which are vegan
Caramel deLites:  also known as Samoas
Tagalongs:  similar to Peanut Butter Patties, which are vegan
Do-si-dos:  also known as Peanut Butter Sandwiches
Shortbread:  also known as Trefoils
Caramel Chocolate Chip:  contains both milk and eggs
Toffee-tastic:  contains milk
Girl Scout S’Mores:  only the variety from Little Brownie Bakers, which isn’t covered in  chocolate
As you can see, a handful of these varieties have a vegan counterpart that’s produced by another manufacturer.
Furthermore, since some of the non-vegan ones resemble the vegan ones in terms of their names and flavors, be sure to look carefully before you buy.
Several Girl Scout cookies aren’t vegan, though they may have similar names as vegan varieties — so you should pay close attention to which ones you buy.

The bottom line
Whether a Girl Scout Cookie is vegan depends on its ingredient list, which is often tied to its specific manufacturer.
Lemonades, Peanut Butter Patties, Thanks-A-Lot, and chocolate-covered Girl Scout S’mores — all of which are made by ABC Bakers — are vegan. Thin Mints are always vegan regardless of the supplier.
Similar varieties of these cookies that look and taste mostly the same but have different names and manufacturers aren’t vegan.
Before you purchase, be sure to check if your local Girl Scout troop sources cookies from ABC Bakers. If so, you’ll have several varieties to choose from. If not, opt for Thin Mints.

References:

https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/vegan-diet-guide
https://www.girlscouts.org/en/cookies/all-about-cookies/Meet-the-Cookies.html
https://www.girlscouts.org/en/cookies/all-about-cookies/Meet-the-Cookies.html
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/how-to-read-food-labels
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/things-vegans-dont-eat
https://www.girlscouts.org/en/cookies/all-about-cookies/Meet-the-Cookies.html
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/7-health-benefits-dark-chocolate
