Title: Mom’s Meals Review: Pros, Cons, Pricing, and Menu

Mom’s Meals is a subscription-based service that aims to promote better health by delivering fresh foods directly to your door.
The company not only allows you to customize your weekly menu based on your personal food preferences but also offers meal plans for a variety of health conditions and dietary patterns.
This article reviews Mom’s Meals, including how it works, how much it costs, and how to get started.
offers numerous menu options
provides fully prepared meals, which can be reheated and enjoyed
may help treat and prevent several health conditions
meals start at just $6.99 per serving
provides minimal information on ingredient sourcing
offers limited options for certain eating patterns, such as keto, paleo, or vegan diets

How it works
Mom’s Meals is a meal delivery service designed for older adults and those with chronic conditions, such as heart disease, diabetes,  kidney disease , or cancer.
The company offers several menus tailored to specific health conditions, all of which are created by dietitians to ensure that your nutritional needs are met.
You can order 10, 14, or 21 meals per week and select each meal individually or receive an assortment of chef’s choice dishes.
You can also opt to receive breakfast meals or lunch and dinner entrées, depending on your personal preferences.
When customizing your menu, you can also exclude items that contain certain ingredients, such as eggs, fish, milk, soy, tree nuts, or wheat.
In addition to offering plans for individuals and caregivers, Mom’s Meals works with many health plans and government agencies to provide meals for people facing food insecurity.

Meal selection
Mom’s Meals offers several menus, each of which caters to a specific health concern or condition.
Some of the menus available include:
general wellness
lower sodium
heart-friendly
diabetes-friendly
renal-friendly
gluten-free
vegetarian
puréed
cancer support
Each menu features a variety of breakfast, lunch, and dinner meals, which typically contain a protein, grain, vegetable, and dessert.
A few examples of meals on the menu include:
a meatball marinara sandwich, sweet pineapple and apple crisp, and whole wheat bun
beef tacos with cheese, Santa Fe rice, and corn tortillas
vegetable primavera with pasta, sweet pineapple and apples, and string cheese
cinnamon apple oatmeal and scrambled eggs
Each week, you can select your favorite dishes from your designated menu to create your own custom meal plan.

Ingredients
Mom’s Meals uses high quality, fresh ingredients in all meals.
According to the company’s website, Mom’s Meals does not add any hormones,  nitrates , or preservatives to meals, although they may be present in some of the ingredients that the service purchases.
All menu items feature a full ingredient list, as well as detailed information on the nutrients in each serving.

Taste and freshness
Mom’s Meals has an extensive menu with a diverse selection of dishes and flavors.
All entrées are fully prepared and can be quickly reheated for an easy and delicious meal.
Items are packaged in containers designed to prevent spoilage and maximize freshness. In fact, each meal can be refrigerated for up to 14 days after delivery.
Meals can also be frozen to extend their shelf life even further, but they should be thawed in the refrigerator prior to reheating.

Diet friendliness
Mom’s Meals caters to several eating patterns, offering a selection of menus designed for various health conditions.
For instance, the company has a diabetes-friendly menu featuring lower carb meals to  support blood sugar control , as well as a heart-friendly menu, which is low in fat and sodium.
The service also has a menu designed specifically for people with cancer. It features dishes that are high in protein and calories to promote healing.
Additionally, Mom’s Meals has a  puréed menu  for those who have difficulty swallowing, as well as a renal-friendly menu, which is low in sodium, potassium, and phosphorus for people on dialysis.
Plus, the company offers options for those following vegetarian, gluten-free, or low sodium diets.
Keep in mind that Mom’s Meals provides limited options for other restrictive eating patterns, including keto, paleo, or vegan diets.

Health benefits
Mom’s Meals makes it easy to enjoy fresh and healthy meals at home, regardless of your dietary needs and preferences.
The service can be especially beneficial for  older adults  who live independently. In fact, it’s estimated that nearly 28% of older adults in the United States face food insecurity, which may be due to chronic disease, functional limitations, or a lack of resources ( 1 ).
Mom’s Meals can also be a great option for those managing chronic health conditions, including diabetes, heart disease, cancer, and kidney disease.
Making dietary modifications can not only improve outcomes for these conditions but also help prevent chronic disease ( 2 ).
For example, the cancer support menu is high in protein and calories, which may help those with certain types of cancer optimize their nutritional status ( 3 ).
Similarly, the renal-friendly menu limits sodium, phosphorus, and potassium, all of which are nutrients that can build up in the blood between  dialysis  treatments among people with kidney disease ( 4 ).

Price
The cost of Mom’s Meals can vary based on the menu you select.
For most plans, meals cost $6.99 per serving. However, certain specialized menus, including the puréed and  gluten-free  menus, cost $7.99 per meal.
In addition to the base cost, there’s a shipping and handling fee of $14.95, which is applied at checkout.

Comparison with competitors
Several similar meal delivery programs cater to older adults and people with chronic health conditions.
For example,  BistroMD  is a service that offers fully prepared meals and heart-healthy, gluten-free, and diabetes-friendly programs.
Similarly to Mom’s Meals, BistroMD features a large menu with a variety of breakfast, lunch, and dinner meals to choose from each week.
However, it’s slightly more expensive than Mom’s Meals, with plans starting at $9.50 per serving.
Top Chef Meals is another option that allows you to order customizable meals geared toward older adults.
This service also offers options that are suitable for several diets, including a selection of renal, low sodium,  low carb , gluten-free, low fat, and diabetes-friendly meals.
With Top Chef Meals, dishes can be ordered à la carte from the menu or in packages, with prices for entrées starting at $6.25 per serving.

The bottom line
Mom’s Meals is a meal delivery service that offers options specifically for older adults and individuals managing chronic health conditions.
Menus are dietitian-designed, and meals are  fully prepared , making it a great choice for enjoying more healthy, nutritionally balanced meals at home.
The service also has a variety of meal choices at an incredibly affordable price point, which may be beneficial for individuals and caregivers on a budget.

References:

https://www.healthline.com/health/kidney-disease
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/low-sodium-diet
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/are-nitrates-and-nitrites-harmful
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/15-ways-to-lower-blood-sugar
https://www.healthline.com/health/full-liquid-diet
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/meal-delivery-for-seniors
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6204426/
https://www.healthline.comhttps://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30077352/
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6723589/
https://www.healthline.com/health/dialysis
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6355949/
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/gluten-free-diet
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/bistromd-review
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/low-carb-diet-meal-plan-and-menu
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/best-prepared-meal-delivery-service
