Title: 11 Best Coffee Mugs for Every Coffee Drinker in 2024

Coffee is the most popular beverage in the United States. In a 2022 survey by the National Coffee Association, 66% of participants said they had consumed a cup of coffee in the previous day ( 1 ).
And whether you drink your coffee at home, at the office, or on the go, the mug you choose is important .
From mugs that keep your coffee warm all morning to stylish ceramic mugs that are microwave-safe, there’s no shortage of options to choose from.
Here are our picks of the 11 best coffee mugs.

A quick look at the best coffee mugs
Best travel mug:   Yeti Rambler
Best eco-friendly:   KeepCup Brew Cork
Best luxury:  Ember Temperature Control Smart Mug 2
Best for keeping coffee hot:   Yeti Rambler Mug
Best ceramic-coated:  W&P Porter Insulated Tumbler
Best transparent:   Bodum Bistro Coffee Mug
Best affordable:  Threshold 15oz Porcelain Coffee Mug
Best handmade:  East Fork Ceramic Mug
Best for French press coffee:   ESPRO P1 Travel Coffee Press
Best for pet parents:  Fringe Studio PetShop Stoneware Mug
Best unique:   Mushroom Lidded Mug

How we chose
We chose the best coffee mugs using the following criteria:
Editor recommendations:  We asked Healthline editors to share the products they own, love, and would recommend.
Reviews:  All the mugs on our list have mostly favorable reviews online.
Price:  We included mugs at a range of prices to fit most budgets.
Features:  We selected products with unique features to suit a variety of needs and preferences.
Vetting:  All the products on our list have been vetted to ensure that they align with Healthline’s brand integrity standards and approach to well-being. You can read more about  our vetting process .
General price ranges with dollar signs ($–$$$) are indicated below. One dollar sign means the product is rather affordable, whereas three dollar signs indicate a higher cost.
Generally, prices range from $5 to $150, though this may vary depending on where you shop. Prices may also vary for products that are available in multiple sizes or are customizable.
$  = under $20
$$  = $20–$50
$$$  = over $50

Healthline’s picks of the best coffee mugs
Price:  $$
Dishwasher-safe:  yes, on the top rack
Volume:  10, 12, or 30 ounces (oz) (296, 355, or 887 milliliters [mL])
Offering just the right balance of form and function, the Yeti Rambler is perfect for taking your  java  on the go.
In addition to a sleek body that easily fits in most car cupholders, it has a magnetic slider lid that’s easy to open. Just keep in mind that the lid is not leak- or spill-proof.
It also doesn’t hurt that the double-wall vacuum insulation keeps drinks warm (or cold) for hours.
This popular mug comes in a variety of colors and sizes and is customizable, with the option to add a monogram or logo.
“I was gifted my Yeti Rambler Tumbler several years ago, and it’s still my go-to mug, regardless of whether I’m taking my coffee on the go or sipping it at home.
“As someone who drinks their coffee slowly, I love that the tumbler keeps my coffee nice and hot all morning long. I also appreciate that it fits in most cupholders, is easy to clean, and doesn’t have lingering odors.”
— Healthline Nutrition Market Editor Kelli McGrane, MS, RD
(P.S. This mug was also a top recommendation of two other Healthline editors!)
dishwasher-safe (top rack)
good for travel
available in multiple colors and sizes
insulated to keep drinks hot or cold for hours
customizable
fits in most cupholders
5-year warranty
does not protect against leaks or spills
Price:  $$
Dishwasher-safe:  no
Volume:  12 oz (355 mL) or 16 oz (473 mL)
If you’re looking for an  eco-friendly option , the Brew Cork should be at the top of your list.
The mug is made of eco-friendly tempered glass and renewable, biodegradable cork. Plus, KeepCup is a Certified B Corporation and donates a percentage of sales to environmental causes.
The Brew Cork is great for bringing to your favorite coffee shop — another eco-friendly plus — because its standard sizes fit perfectly under most espresso machines and  coffee makers .
The non-insulated mug won’t keep coffee warm for long, so you may need to reheat your coffee at least once if you tend to sip slowly.
made from eco-friendly materials
fits in most cupholders
splash-proof sipper lid
not dishwasher-safe
not insulated
can only be microwaved up to 100°F (38°C)
Price:  $$$
Dishwasher-safe:  no
Volume:  10 oz (296 mL) or 14 oz (414 mL)
While it’s the priciest mug on our list, the Ember mug may be worth the cost if you’re tired of reheating your coffee throughout the morning.
The mug is battery-powered and can keep your coffee hot for 80 minutes, or you can set the mug on a charging coaster to keep your drink hot for hours.
The Ember mug works with an app that allows you to set the exact temperature you’d like your coffee to be held at, within the range of 120–145°F (49–63°C).
As a safety feature, the mug automatically enters sleep mode when it’s empty.
keeps coffee at a constant temperature
Apple and Android compatibl e
enters sleep mode when mug is empty
available in different colors and sizes
not dishwasher-safe
expensive
not suitable for travel
battery requires a recharge after 80 minutes
requires a nearby outlet if using the coaster
Price:  $$
Dishwasher-safe:  yes
Volume:  10 oz (296 mL), 14 oz (414 mL), 24 oz (710 mL)
For a low tech option to keep your coffee hot (or cold) for hours, we recommend the Yeti Rambler Mug.
A cozier alternative to the Rambler Tumbler, the mug features an easy-to-hold grip and double-wall vacuum insulation.
It comes in several colors and sizes, including a large 24-oz (710-mL) size for serious coffee drinkers.
Plus, its wide mouth makes it versatile — it also works well as a bowl for  oatmeal , soups, and stews.
“I don’t own one of these mugs myself. However, I used to eye one in the coffee shop I frequented daily for years, and I’ve gifted this mug to other people. This is one of those mugs that I’ve seen ‘fought’ over in a household, so if you’re gifting, it may be best given in pairs.”
— Healthline Editor Candice Abellon
dishwasher-safe (top rack)
insulated to keep coffee hot or cold for hours
wide-mouth design with handle
convenient magnetic slider lid
available in multiple colors, sizes, and customization options
5-year warranty
does not protect against leaks or spills
not microwave-safe
does not fit in most cupholders
Price:  $$
Dishwasher-safe:  yes
Volume:  20 oz (592 mL)
This best-of-both-worlds mug has the feel of ceramic with the heat retention of a metal tumbler.
Thanks to the ceramic coating, your coffee never touches the metal and there’s no metallic aftertaste. Ceramic mugs are also great for preventing lingering odors and tastes.
The tumbler also features a splash-resistant lid and a narrow shape that fits most cupholders. Plus, it comes in a wide variety of colors and patterns to suit most tastes.
Just keep in mind that because it contains metal, the tumbler can’t be placed in the microwave.
dishwasher-safe (top rack)
made of ceramic over metal to prevent any metallic aftertaste
available in multiple colors
insulated to keep drinks hot or cold for hours
fits in most cupholders
not microwave-safe
ceramic coating may chip if bumped or dropped
Price:  $$–$$$
Dishwasher-safe:  yes
Volume:  10 oz (296 mL) or 15 oz (445 mL)
For Instagram-worthy photos — or just a really pretty drinking experience — these transparent glass mugs provide the perfect window to watch milk swirl into coffee or to enjoy the layered look of your latte or cappuccino.
The Bodum Bistro Coffee Mug features double-wall insulation to keep the outside of the mug cool to the touch while your beverage stays warm inside. The heat-resistant glass is even safe for the microwave.
“We have an espresso maker, and I love using these transparent mugs because I can see the espresso and crema layers when I pull a perfect  espresso shot . Watching the milk swirl into the shot of coffee is a favorite morning ritual.
“Plus, I love that the mug does not get hot to the touch, but the coffee stays warm.”
— Healthline freelance writer Cara Rosenbloom, RD
visually appealing transparent glass
dishwasher- and microwave-safe
double-wall insulation
good for hot and cold beverages
not designed for travel
made of mouth-blown glass made by artisans, so each mug may have slight differences in height, weight, and thickness
Price:  $
Dishwasher-safe:  yes
Volume:  15 oz (445 mL)
These everyday mugs from Target feature a clean design, easy-to-grip handles, and a nice price tag — approximately $5 each.
They are also dishwasher- and microwave-safe, so we’re confident that they’ll become a staple in your kitchen.
These sleek, white mugs match virtually any decor. However, their appearance is also a potential downside, as they are a bit bland.
dishwasher- and microwave-safe
affordable
easy to find
thin handle for sturdy grip
plain white color and style
not insulated
not designed to take on the go
Price:  $$
Dishwasher-safe:  yes
Volume:  12 oz (355 mL) or 16 oz (473 mL)
If you prefer a special, handmade mug for your morning coffee, this one fits the bill — just keep in mind that it’s not cheap.
This sturdy ceramic mug is handcrafted by artisans in North Carolina. It’s dishwasher-safe, microwave-safe, and available in assorted earth-tone colors. The materials are guaranteed  lead-free .
ceramic mug made from regional materials
dishwasher- and microwave-safe
lead-free
made by USA-based artisans
available in three colors and two sizes
expensive
not designed for taking your coffee on the go
Price:  $$
Dishwasher-safe:  yes, top rack
Volume:  12 oz (355 mL)
If you’re a fan of French press-style coffee, this is the mug for you. It’s a French press and a travel coffee mug in one!
Simply brew your coffee right in the mug for about 4 minutes and then press the filter to stop extraction — no need to find a place for your coffee grounds or worry about your coffee getting too bitter.
The mug has a reusable micro-filter to keep your beverage free from coffee grinds or grit.
Plus, thanks to the vacuum insulation, your coffee will stay hot for hours.
dishwasher-safe (top rack)
brews French press-style coffee on the go
features a reusable micro-filter to keep grinds and sludge out of your drink
vacuum-insulated
fits in most cupholders
not microwave-safe
Price:  $
Dishwasher-safe:  yes
Volume:  14 oz (414 mL)
Cat and dog parents, this is the mug for you. Designed with cute expressions and visuals that honor our furry friends, these mugs will bring a smile to your face every time you take a sip.
The mugs come in a variety of fun designs and are safe to use in the dishwasher and microwave.
This mug is not designed for travel but is great for curling up on the couch with Whiskers or Rover.
“I love these mugs. They’re so cute, with tons of fun designs. They’re also a really nice size, and they have a good weight to them as well.
“I received this mug as a gift from a friend, and it’s become one of my favorites. I drink coffee in the morning and tea at night, and it’s perfect for both beverages. It’s also microwave-safe — a plus if you reheat your coffee a million times like I do — and dishwasher-safe.”
— Healthline Senior Editor Chelsea Logan
dishwasher- and microwave-safe
available in several cute dog and cat designs
not insulated
not designed for travel
Price:  $
Dishwasher-safe:  yes
Volume:  10 oz (296 mL)
Calling all fans of “ Fantastic Fungi ” — these adorable lidded mugs are perfect as a gift or for adding a whimsical touch to your coffee mug collection.
The mugs come in four colors and are dishwasher- and microwave-safe. Plus, the cozy mushroom cap lid helps keep your coffee warm longer.
“I love this cute little mushroom mug. It brightens my day just sitting on my kitchen counter next to my tea kettle, and the little mushroom lid helps to keep my drinks warm longer. I love that it comes in different colors so you can collect them all in a set but still have variety.”
— Healthline Editor Crystal Hoshaw
dishwasher- and microwave-safe
available in four colors
includes a lid to keep beverages warm longer
affordable
not insulated
not designed for travel

A quick comparison of the best coffee mugs

How to choose
As this list shows, there are many coffee mug options to choose from. To help narrow your search, here are some things to keep in mind:
How much coffee do you drink in one sitting?  Most coffee mugs are available in sizes of 10–16 oz (296–473 mL), though some are designed for larger or smaller pours.
Where will you be using it?  Decide whether you need a mug for home use or one you can tote to meetings or bring in the car. If you need a  travel mug , look for an insulated body and a spill-resistant lid.
How much do you want to spend?  The mugs on our list range in price from $5 to $150. Determine what you want to spend before you start browsing
What kind of material do you want?  Mugs can be made of glass, ceramic, metal, or other materials. While metal is often better for keeping coffee hot, ceramic and glass mugs often look prettier and can help prevent lingering smells and odors.
Do you regularly reheat your coffee?  If you tend to drink your coffee slowly, consider purchasing an insulated mug or splurging on a high tech device that keeps your coffee hot. Alternatively, you can go with a mug that’s microwave-safe.
Do you mind washing it by hand?  Many mugs are dishwasher-safe. However, some are made from special materials or feature designs that require washing by hand. Choose what works best for you.
What do you want it to look like?  While some people only care that their mug keeps their coffee hot, others enjoy a mug that’s visually appealing. Choose a mug that best fits your style.

Frequently asked questions
The best reusable coffee mug is one that you’ll use daily. While some people prefer Yeti mugs because they’re insulated to keep coffee hot longer, others prefer ceramic mugs that are microwave-safe and don’t give drinks a metallic taste.
Thanks to its double-wall vacuum insulation design, the Yeti Rambler Tumbler is our pick for the best mug to keep your coffee hot.
If you don’t mind splurging, the Ember Temperature Control Smart Mug 2 is also a good option — it’s battery-operated to keep your coffee at a consistent temperature.
For an at-home ceramic mug, expect to spend $15–$30, though some products may be cheaper. Travel mugs tend to be a bit more expensive, at $25–$50.

The bottom line
If you start your day with a cup of coffee — or end it with a cup of decaf — then it’s worth investing in a good coffee mug (or two).
When shopping for a coffee mug, be sure to consider cost, size, style, and material to find the one that’s best for you.

References:
https://www.ncausa.org/Newsroom/Coffee-continues-record-high-popularity-and-post-COVID-recovery
https://www.healthline.com#travel
https://www.healthline.com#eco-friendly
https://www.healthline.com#high-tech
https://www.healthline.com#hot
https://www.healthline.com#ceramic
https://www.healthline.com#transparent
https://www.healthline.com#affordable
https://www.healthline.com#luxury
https://www.healthline.com#french-press
https://www.healthline.com#pets
https://www.healthline.com#whimsical
https://www.healthline.com/about/vet-brands-and-products
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/top-evidence-based-health-benefits-of-coffee
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/eco-friendly-food-packaging
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/best-coffee-maker
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/9-benefits-oats-oatmeal
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/best-kitchen-tools
https://www.healthline.com/health-news/5-ways-to-reduce-your-exposure-to-lead
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/fantastic-fungi-director-interview
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/best-travel-coffee-mug
