Title: Sunbasket Review for 2024: A Dietitian’s Experience Trying the Meals


Healthline meal delivery score: 4.6 out of 5
Sunbasket is one of our favorite  meal kit services  because it’s focused on high quality ingredients.
The service offers two options: You can purchase meal kits, which include step-by-step recipes and premeasured ingredients, or you can  purchase fully prepared meals , which you simply need to reheat to enjoy.
Meals are produced using primarily seasonal, organic, and sustainably sourced ingredients.
In addition to dinner entrees, Sunbasket offers optional add-ons, including a variety of breakfast and lunch dishes, fresh pasta, proteins, and snacks.
However, it’s relatively expensive and doesn’t offer options for all specialty diets or diet restrictions, though it does cater to many. This article provides an in-depth look at our experience with Sunbasket.
One Healthline tester scored Sunbasket across 10 categories and allotted points from 0–5. The scores below reflect the average rating for each category.
Overall:  4.6
Sign-up, delivery, and cancellation processes:  5
Meal variety:  5
Nutrition:  5
Sustainability:  4
Ingredient quality and freshness:  5
Ease of preparation:  4
Taste:  4
Affordability:  3
Learn more about  how we test meal kits .

Who tried it

My experience trying Sunbasket
variety of meal plans and recipes
prioritizes organic and sustainable ingredients
minimal time and effort required
recyclable and compostable packaging
multiple add-on options
great flavor and variety of ingredients
expensive
contains some plastic packaging
unsuitable for those with allergies or certain dietary restrictions
I received three recipes to cook:
Black Angus Rib-Eyes with Warm Kale,  Romanesco , and Goat Cheese Salad
Mediterranean Garlic Shrimp with Spanish Rice
Mojo Tacos with Shredded Cabbage, Pickled Onions, and Salsa Verde
My Sunbasket box was actually delivered after I’d already gone to bed, though with a 9-month old, bedtime is pretty early in our house.
However, I was impressed that the ice packs kept all of the ingredients fresh and cool overnight — even the shrimp was still perfectly cold, which hasn’t always been my experience when trying other meal delivery services.
I also appreciated that the meal kit ingredients were packaged by meal, as it helped keep my fridge organized.
Most of the meals Sunbasket provides can be prepared in 30 minutes or less, making them great options if you’re running short on time during the week.
In fact, both the tacos and the Mediterranean shrimp dishes took me less than 20 minutes to whip up. The steaks took a tad longer, though the meal was still ready in less than half an hour.
While I didn’t try them, the company offers several meals that are oven-ready or fully prepared, including some dishes that require as few as 6 minutes to prepare.
Plus, most of the add-on  breakfast  and lunch options require little to no preparation and can be either microwaved or enjoyed as is.
Each meal comes with a small recipe booklet, which I found to be less user-friendly than the large recipe cards that many other services provide.
Even so, I found the recipes straightforward and the meals easy to make.
What’s more, two of the three recipes required just one frying pan and one or two mixing bowls, making cleanup a breeze.
Chef Justin Kelly creates and designs all Sunbasket recipes to be both delicious and nutritious — which they are.
Thanks to seasonal ingredients and house-made spice blends and sauces, each of the meals I tried tasted fresh and flavorful.
Here’s what I thought of each meal:
This recipe was my family’s favorite, as the mojo marinade provided just the right amount of heat, which was balanced out by the tangy pickled onions and tart salsa verde. I was also super impressed by the corn tortillas, which were thicker and softer than most store-bought varieties.
What I appreciated most about this dish was how the  garlic -porcini seasoning didn’t overpower the natural flavor of the steaks. Furthermore, the salad with fresh herbs and lemon vinaigrette could easily be served at a restaurant.
This was the only dish that I wish would have offered a bit more variety in terms of flavor. That said, the meal was still delicious, and the shrimp was of good quality.
I’ve tried several meal delivery services and can confidently say that Sunbasket is one of my favorites.
It offers a great variety of meals to choose from, including meal kits and prepared entrees, and the service’s dedication to organic and seasonal ingredients results in dishes that taste fresh and are brimming with flavor.
Therefore, if cost wasn’t a consideration, I’d absolutely order Sunbasket again.
However, as I have access to organic and  local ingredients  at a nearby supermarket — and I have the time to plan and prep my meals — it’s hard for my family to justify the cost of Sunbasket.

Sunbasket meal plans
Sunbasket offers a range of options. To get started, you simply choose two or more dinners from the weekly menu available on the Sunbasket website.
Even if you select one of the meal plans below, you can still customize your weekly menu by mixing and matching with other recipes.
You can select from several meal plans, including:
Chef’s Choice:  seasonal recipes
Paleo:  high protein meals  without grains, gluten, soy, corn, or dairy
Carb-Conscious:  meals containing 25–35 grams of net carbs per serving
Gluten-Free:  wheat alternatives; unsuitable for those with severe  gluten-related disorders , such as celiac disease, as foods are packaged in a facility that processes food allergens, including gluten
Diabetes-Friendly:  recipes approved by the American Diabetes Association
Vegetarian:  excludes meat, fish, or poultry
Pescatarian:  vegetarian with wild-caught seafood
Fresh & Ready:  heat-and-eat meals, some ready in as little as 4 minutes
Mediterranean:  whole grains, healthy fats, wild-caught seafood, and responsibly sourced meats
You can download the service’s free app, which is available for free on both the Google Play Store and the Apple App Store.
While all dinners can be cooked and served in less than 30 minutes, several “speedy” options are available, which are ready to enjoy in less than 20 minutes.
Add-ons, including breakfast, lunch, and  snack  options, are also available for an additional fee.

Sunbasket meal options
Sunbasket offers a variety of dinner recipes each week, including vegetarian options, seafood dishes, and meat or poultry meals.
With pasta dishes, curries, tacos, pilafs, paellas, and  whole grain bowls  available, there are plenty of options that will allow you to tailor your weekly menu to your taste buds and dietary restrictions or needs.
All Sunbasket meals use fresh, varied ingredients and feature herbs, spices, sauces, and seasonings to maximize the flavor of each dish.
Here are a few examples of meals you may find on the menu:
Broccoli and Fresh Mozzarella Panini with Honey-Glazed Carrots
Beet and Quinoa Salad with Orange, Goat Cheese, and Toasted Naan
Seared Salmon with Chimichurri and Provençal Vegetables
Lebanese Beef and Spinach “Tacos” with Spicy Tahini Yogurt
Burmese Salmon Salad with Lemongrass, Cabbage, and Apple
Dinner meal kits contain either 2 or 4 servings per recipe, while Fresh & Ready meals are individually portioned and contain just 1 serving each.
Examples of Fresh & Ready meals include:
Chipotle Butternut Squash Stew with Chorizo, Cauliflower, and Cashews
Spaghetti alla Beef Bolognese
Middle Eastern Chickpea and Freekeh Grain Bowl with Herb Yogurt
Butter Chicken
Burrito Bowl with Achiote-Citrus Braised Pork, Corn, and Black Beans
Breakfast options are mostly ready-to-eat meals such as egg bites, hand pies,  yogurt , oatmeal,  protein bars , waffles, juices, and smoothies.
Similarly, lunch dishes from Sunbasket include portable soups, microwaveable meals, cooked proteins (including plant-based options), and tortillas and breads.

Choosing your meals
You can filter the results to show meals that contain fewer than 600 calories; “speedy” options, which are ready in 20 minutes or less; or dishes that fit a variety of dietary restrictions (paleo, diabetes-friendly, gluten-free, soy-free, dairy-free, or vegan).
You can also look at detailed information for any recipe or meal, including the ingredients, potential allergens, nutritional content, and step-by-step preparation instructions.
Prices are listed on an item-by-item basis, and you can see your order total in your cart before you check out.
You can also select a specific delivery date. Your order can be changed until 3 p.m. Eastern Time on the Wednesday before it’s set to arrive.
Breakfast options include fully prepared items such as:
egg bites
breakfast burritos
oatmeal cups
granola
waffles
nut butter
vegan butter
protein bars
juices
smoothies
coffees
The service also has a wide variety of prepared add-on items for lunch, including:
salads
empanadas
pizzas
noodle bowls
grain cups
soups
broths
bread, buns, and tortillas
What’s more, you can order several types of pasta, sauces, snacks, and proteins such as seafood, beef, and poultry.
Items are priced individually and can be added to your order each week using the website or app.

What ingredients does Sunbasket use?
Sunbasket prioritizes high quality, sustainable ingredients and estimates that 99% of the produce that it ships is  organic .
Additionally, the service currently only uses organic milk, yogurt, eggs, and tofu.
In terms of seafood, Sunbasket uses wild-caught or sustainably raised seafood that the  Monterey Bay Aquarium Seafood Watch  — an organization that promotes sustainable seafood — has labeled either a “Best Choice” or a “Good Alternative.”
Sunbasket’s meat and poultry are also antibiotic- and hormone-free, and the lamb is always pasture-raised.
Organic and/or grass-fed meat and poultry are also available for select recipes.
Depending on the recipe, some ingredients arrive premeasured or prepared for easier cooking.

How is Sunbasket packaged?
Each shipment arrives in recyclable and composable  packaging .
However, individual ingredients may be enclosed in plastic bags or containers, which may or may not be recyclable depending on your location.
To maximize the freshness of your meal, orders are shipped in a paper-insulated package, and meats are frozen in airtight bags.
You can select a preferred day for your weekly delivery, which can ensure that you’re able to refrigerate ingredients promptly once they arrive.
When opening your box, you’ll find brown paper bags for each meal, which include the ingredients you’ll need for that specific dish, as well as recipe instructions.
Proteins, such as shrimp, poultry, and red meat, are located under an ice pack for better temperature control.
Instead of large cards with step-by-step photos, Sunbasket includes small recipe booklets that contain instructions, nutrition facts, and a list of tools and pantry ingredients required.
Recipes are also available online, along with bonus content, such as homemade drinks, desserts, and videos.

Are Sunbasket meals healthy?
Sunbasket meals feature an array of fresh, seasonal, and nutrient-dense ingredients, including many varieties of vegetables, whole grains, and proteins.
Most meals are also nutritionally balanced, with a good amount of protein, fat, fiber, and carbohydrates in each serving.
Sunbasket’s meal kits are low in added sugar and free of highly processed ingredients — a plus in our book.
However, keep in mind that some meals may contain a higher amount of calories, carbs, or sodium in each serving.
In particular, many of the Fresh & Ready meals contain more than 1,000 milligrams of sodium per serving, which may not be suitable for those following a  low sodium  or heart-healthy diet.
Similarly, some meals contain more than 700 calories per serving and more than 80 grams of carbs. While these meals can still fit into a well-rounded, nutritious diet, they might not be ideal for people who are following a low calorie diet or a low carb diet such as  keto .
Therefore, if you have any dietary restrictions, it’s important to check the nutrition facts for each meal when selecting your weekly menu to determine which recipes fit into your diet.

How much does Sunbasket cost?
Compared with its competitors, Sunbasket can be somewhat pricey. Meals cost $9.99–$17.99 per serving at the time of publication.
Keep in mind these prices do not include add-ons, such as breakfast, lunch, or snack options, which could increase the price.
The prices also do not include shipping, which costs a flat fee of $9.99 after your first box.

How to contact Sunbasket customer service
If you have any issues with your order, there are several ways to contact customer service.
You can easily email, call, or text a customer service representative during normal business hours Monday through Friday.
You can get assistance and advice from Sunbasket customer experts, and a self-service section is available on the website to help you resolve simple issues with ingredients or delivery. A digital assistant, Sunny B., is also available 24 hours a day.
Sunbasket offers a money-back guarantee and promises a full refund if you’re dissatisfied with your order for any reason.

Sunbasket alternatives
Sunbasket stands out from its competitors as one of the few meal delivery services to prioritize high quality, organic, and sustainably sourced ingredients.
However, this comes with a slightly higher price tag.  HelloFresh  and  Blue Apron  both start at just $7.99 (depending on the number of meals/servings).
Sunbasket recipes are also often quicker and more convenient than other services. Many meals arrive pre-prepared and are ready to enjoy in less than 30 minutes.
Many other meal delivery services provide ingredients that haven’t been premeasured, cut, or cooked, meaning that some recipes can take up to an hour to prepare.
Additionally, while some other delivery services offer add-ons like wine pairings, smoothies, and snacks, Sunbasket is one of the few meal kits to offer extra meals, like breakfast and lunch.
Finally, keep in mind that if budget is your primary concern, you may want to consider a meal planning app, such as  eMeals  or  PlateJoy . While you’ll need to buy your groceries in-store or online, these services can still save you time, as they offer customized meal plans and grocery lists.

Who should try Sunbasket?
Sunbasket may be a good choice for health-conscious people who are short on time but still want to enjoy tasty,  homemade meals  using high quality ingredients.
Because it’s slightly more expensive than many other meal delivery services, it may not be the right fit for those on a tight budget or people who aren’t as concerned about eating only organic or sustainable ingredients.
Additionally, those with food allergies or a gluten-related disorder should be cautious when using Sunbasket, as foods are packaged in a facility that processes major food allergens, including gluten.
The options are also somewhat limited for those with certain dietary restrictions, which can make it challenging for those following a strict dairy-free or  ketogenic diet .
That said, if it fits within your budget and you don’t have special dietary concerns, Sunbasket may be worth trying, especially if you prioritize organic, seasonal ingredients or meals prepared with fresh herbs and custom spice blends.

Brand reputation
Sunbasket is not currently accredited by the Better Business Bureau but  holds an A- rating , which is based on factors such as the company’s business practices, its complaint history, and how long it has been in business.
On  Trustpilot , Sunbasket has an average rating of 4.7 out of 5 stars, which is based on 3,318 customer reviews.
Many reviewers on Trustpilot report satisfaction with the quality of meals and ingredients, the responsiveness of customer service, and the variety of options available.
On the other hand, some customers mention experiencing issues with incomplete deliveries, order errors, and missing ingredients. A few also mention dissatisfaction with the high price per serving.
In 2020, Sunbasket was involved in a  class action lawsuit , which alleged that it disregarded employee privacy by collecting and using employees’ personal biometric data.

Frequently asked questions
Sunbasket offers two types of meals: Meal Kits and Fresh & Ready meals.
Meal Kits come with premeasured ingredients and require a bit of prep and cooking, typically between 20 and 40 minutes. Fresh & Ready meals are ready to heat and eat. They need only a few minutes in the microwave or oven.
Both meal types offer paleo, gluten-free, dairy-free, soy-free, diabetes-friendly, vegetarian, pescatarian, vegan, low carb, and Mediterranean options.
Sunbasket also offers breakfast and lunch options, as well as several à la carte products such as proteins (both animal and plant-based) and snacks.
Price depends on the number of meals you select. Meal Kits serve two or four. Fresh & Ready meals serve one.
The least expensive meal on either plan costs $9.99. The most expensive meal costs $17.99.
This will depend on what you’re looking for in a meal delivery service.
Sunbasket has more diet-specific meal options and uses mostly organic ingredients. Fresh & Ready meals can save time since you don’t have to chop or cook any of the ingredients.
HelloFresh meals require a bit more prep than Sunbasket meals and don’t contain many organic ingredients. The price per serving is cheaper than Sunbasket, but it’s worth noting HelloFresh doesn’t offer as many diet-specific options.
Sunbasket prioritizes sustainability by using mostly recyclable, reusable, or compostable packaging to minimize its environmental impact. Its meals also feature sustainably sourced seafood, organic produce, and responsibly raised meat without hormones or antibiotics.
The company says it works closely with suppliers to ensure that it adheres to strict animal welfare standards. Also, the company is working toward transitioning to more humane processing methods.
Sunbasket prices can vary depending on the specific meals and add-ons you select.
While Sunbasket is more expensive than other meal delivery services or buying groceries on your own, it may be worth the cost for people who prefer eating organic or experimenting with new recipes each week.
Yes. You can cancel or change your order on the website or using the Sunbasket app. You can also skip a week or forward your weekly box to a different address if you’re traveling.
Changes to your weekly order must be submitted online by 3 p.m. Eastern Time on the Wednesday before your delivery.

The bottom line
Sunbasket is a meal delivery service that offers flavorful, fresh, and  healthy meals  produced using mostly organic, sustainable ingredients.
While it’s a bit pricier than some similar services, it offers a good variety of meals that are easy to prepare and can be customized to fit most diets.
Sunbasket may be worth a try for those looking to enjoy healthy, delicious meals that require little time or effort.

References:

https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/best-meal-delivery-service
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/best-prepared-meal-delivery-service
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/how-we-test-meal-kits
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/list-of-vegetables
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/12-best-foods-to-eat-in-morning
https://www.healthline.com/health/garlic-for-yeast-infection
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/why-eat-local-food
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/high-protein-diet-plan
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/is-gluten-bad
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/29-healthy-snacks-for-weight-loss
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/11-proven-benefits-of-quinoa
https://www.healthline.com/health/yogurt-for-yeast-infection
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/vegan-protein-bars
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/plant-butter
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/what-is-organic-food
https://www.seafoodwatch.org/
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/eco-friendly-food-packaging
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/low-sodium-diet
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/keto-meal-delivery#A-quick-look-at-the-best-keto-meal-delivery-services
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/hello-fresh-review
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/blue-apron-review
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/emeals-review
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/platejoy
https://www.healthline.com/health/food-nutrition/home-cooking-versus-takeout
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/ketogenic-diet-101
https://www.healthline.comhttp://bbb.org/us/ca/san-francisco/profile/internet-service/sun-basket-inc-1116-536986
https://www.healthline.comhttp://trustpilot.com/review/sunbasket.com
https://www.healthline.comhttp://republictimes.net/lawsuit-filed-against-sun-basket-practices/
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/healthy-meal-delivery
