Title: The 9 Best Rowing Machines


A quick look at the best rowing machines
Best overall rowing machine:  Concept2 RowErg
Best budget rowing machine:  Sunny Health & Fitness Magnetic Rowing Machine with LCD Monitor
Best rowing machine with adjustable resistance levels:  Echelon Row S Smart Rower
Best rowing machine for small spaces:  Stamina BodyTrac Glider 1050 Rowing Machine
Best rowing machine for beginners:  MaxKare Foldable Magnetic Rowing Machine
Best high tech rowing machine:  NordicTrack RW900
Best rowing machine with an oversized seat:  Schwinn Crewmaster Rowing Machine
Best rowing machine with Bluetooth connectivity:  Women’s Health Men’s Health Bluetooth Rower
Best water rower:   WaterRower Classic
Total-body workouts are all the rage, especially since so many people are pressed for time. Still, finding a piece of exercise equipment that hits every major muscle group is next to impossible — unless you have a rowing machine.
Case in point: To complete one full rowing stroke, you’ll need assistance from numerous muscles, including your quadriceps, glutes, calves, hamstrings, upper back, arms, and core muscles.
Plus, to make it through an entire workout, you’ll need to rely on your cardiovascular system.
In other words, exercising on a rowing machine requires both strength and stamina. But don’t worry if you’re just starting a fitness program. Rowing is low impact and you can regulate the intensity, so it’s appropriate for all fitness levels.

How we chose
We’ve researched several top picks and considered the type of tension, resistance levels, cost, and extra features like touch screens. The  rowing machines  in this roundup were chosen based on the following criteria:
Customer reviews.  We looked at online customer reviews and the 5-star rating system from Amazon. We also reviewed product websites. The rowing machines on this list all have at least a 4-star rating.
Resistance tension.  We looked at rowing machines with magnetic, air, water, and hydraulic tension. Hydraulic is the most affordable, but magnetic and water seem to be the best for a smooth and quiet ride.
Features.  We considered features like touch screens, multiple resistance levels, size, seat and pedal quality, on-demand classes, and storage.
Affordability.  Rowing machines can range in price from $150 to well over $3,000. Although some pricier models are packed with amazing features, we generally chose moderately priced rowers, with just a few picks on the higher end.
Here are the 9 best rowing machines in 2022.
General price ranges with dollar signs ($–$$$) are indicated below. One dollar sign means the product is rather affordable, whereas three dollar signs indicate a higher cost.
Generally, prices range from $150–$3,000, though this may vary depending on where you shop.
Pricing guide
$  = under $500
$$  = $500–$1,000
$$$  = over $1,000

Healthline’s picks for the best rowing machines
Price:  $$
Size:  96 × 24 inches (244 × 61 cm)
Max weight capacity:  500 pounds (227 kg)
Warranty:  5-year frame, 2-year parts
Resistance type:  air resistance
Display:  PM5 performance monitor connects via Bluetooth; backlit LCD illuminates automatically when monitor powers on
Smart features:  Bluetooth-enabled monitor connects to smartphone or tablet, ErgData to store and display workout results and upload workouts, ErgRace allows you to take part in online races, 30+ different apps, device holder for smartphone or tablet, ANT+ supported, USB flash drive for storing data
The Concept2 shows up on practically every list of top rowing machines, and for good reason — it’s built by rowers. It’s also a top pick for gyms and health clubs.
The digital monitor tracks your pace, watts, stroke rate, calories, and more. This information is automatically stored on a USB drive or internal memory after every workout.
The RowErg uses air resistance, which minimizes noise and provides a smooth ride, and it’s Bluetooth-enabled so you can connect wirelessly to a variety of apps. What’s more, the RowErg comes in both standard and elevated seat heights.
Plus, if you purchase directly from the company, you’re eligible for a 30-day money-back guarantee.
accommodates users of many sizes and weights up to 500 pounds
easy to assemble
two seat heights
can be separated into two parts for easy storage
needs a large footprint for use and storage
pricier than other rowing machines
requires some tech skills to operate
Price:  $
Size:  78 × 19 inches (198 × 48.3 cm)
Max weight capacity:  250 pounds (113.6 kg)
Warranty:  3-year frame, 180-day parts
Resistance type:  magnetic resistance
Display:  LCD monitor
Smart features:  LCD shows calories, distance, speed, and time; SunnyFit App
Looking for a budget-friendly rowing machine? Sunny’s magnetic rower delivers a good workout and is easy on your wallet.
With high ratings from users of all levels, this no-frills rower is ideal for anyone new to rowing, as well as for experienced rowers looking for a low cost option.
The Sunny rower comes with an LCD monitor that displays stats like your workout duration and calories burned, as well as an easy-to-use adjustable dial that offers eight levels of magnetic resistance.
Plus, it’s made with extra-long slide rails, so it can accommodate a variety of heights.
affordable sticker price for a quality, entry-level rower
eight resistance levels
extra-long slide rail to accommodate various body sizes
wheels for easy transport
may not be suitable for larger bodies
louder than other rowers
might not be challenging enough for very advanced users
Price:  $$$
Size:  85 × 24 inches (216 × 61 cm)
Max weight capacity:  350 pounds (159 kg)
Warranty:  1-year parts and labor
Resistance type:  magnetic resistance
Display:  22-inch (56-cm) HD touch screen
Smart features:  Bluetooth technology, dual audio jacks, HD touch screen, live and on-demand classes, rotating screen, 5-watt built-in Bluetooth speakers, music
If you need a machine that can handle multiple fitness levels, consider the  Echelon Row S Smart Rower . This rower can be set to 32 levels of magnetic resistance, making it the ideal pick for a home with multiple users.
Plus, the resistance controls are easy to access — they’re located on the handlebars.
The Echelon comes with a 22-inch (56-cm) touch screen that flips 180 degrees. You’ll need a monthly membership to access the rowing workouts and other on-demand classes like  yoga , strength training, and  Pilates .
180-degree screen rotation for off-equipment training
foldable for easy storage
easy-glide seat
32 magnetic resistance levels
high sticker price
monthly subscription required to access live and on-demand classes
requires a large space
Price:  $
Size:  58.25 × 42.5 inches (148 × 108 cm)
Max weight capacity:  250 pounds (113.6 kg)
Warranty:  1-year frame, 90-day parts
Resistance type:  hydraulic resistance
Display:  LCD monitor
Smart features:  monitor to display workout time, stroke count, calories burned; Smart Fitness app
Exercise equipment takes up a lot of room, but this compact rower from Stamina is our top pick for small spaces .
Measuring 58.25 inches (148 cm) long and 42.5 inches (108 cm) wide, this machine is ideal for apartments, and it weighs only 39 pounds (17.7 kg).
Plus, it has foldable arms for compact storage and a multifunctional LCD screen to track your metrics. It uses hydraulic cylinder resistance, so the rowing motion isn’t as smooth as some others, but it offers a wide range of motion when rowing.
Note that because this rower is small, it has a weight limit of 250 pounds (113 kg).
good size for apartments and small rooms
very low price
foldable for simple storage
low tech for easy use
limited warranty
can be cumbersome to operate
might be too basic for advanced fitness levels
Price:  $
Size:  76.4 × 19.7 inches (194 × 50 cm)
Max weight capacity:  243 pounds (119.5 kg)
Warranty:  none
Resistance type:  magnetic resistance
Display:  LCD monitor
Smart features:  screen to display calories, reps, minutes, time, speed, distance, and heart rate
New to rowing? No problem. This rowing machine from MaxKare is affordable, reliable, and easy to operate.
Designed with a magnetic control flywheel and offering 16 levels of resistance, this rower is appropriate for all levels, from  beginner  to advanced.
Users like the extra-long slide rails, which make the rower ideal for taller people. The LCD monitor tracks your workout duration, stroke rate, row count, and calories burned. And the machine is foldable for easy storage.
foldable for simple storage
large cushioned seat
affordable entry-level rower
might be too low tech for advanced users
maximum user weight of only 245 pounds
only 16 resistance levels
Price:  $$$
Size:  86.5 × 22 inches (220 × 56 cm)
Max weight capacity:  250 pounds (113.6 kg)
Warranty:  10-year frame, 2-year parts, 1-year labor
Resistance type:  silent magnetic resistance
Display:  22-inch HD touch screen
Smart features:  smart HD touch screen, Bluetooth-enabled, iFIT live and on-demand classes with mobile app, 30-watt premium sound system, wireless connectivity, auto-adjusting mode
If high quality on-demand classes top your must-have list, this  rower from NordicTrack  has you covered.
It’s designed to use with  iFit  — an interactive personal training app — so you’ll have access to live studio classes and a library of on-demand workouts for rowing, yoga, cardio, strength training, and more.
The 22-inch (56-cm) touch screen comes with an adjustable console, so you can rotate the screen when not on the rower.
What’s more, this magnetic-resistance rower has 26 resistance levels to provide workout variety.
Finally, if you need a boost of motivation, take advantage of the Automatic Trainer Control, which allows your trainer to adjust the resistance.
adjustable touch screen for off-rower workouts
silent magnetic resistance technology for a smooth and quiet ride
automatic resistance adjustment feature
quiet and smooth ride with upgraded flywheel and sliding rail system
requires monthly subscription to access live and on-demand classes
high sticker price
requires a large space for use and storage
Price:  $
Size:  not disclosed on manufacturer’s website
Max weight capacity:  300 pounds (136 kg)
Warranty:  10-year frame, 3-year parts, 1-year labor
Resistance type:  magnetic resistance
Display:  LCD monitor
Smart features:  screen to display time, distance, strokes, calories, recovery, and pulse
Looking for a rower with a larger seat? The Schwinn Crewmaster comes with an extra-large seat designed to cushion your backside while you work out.
Additionally, it has oversized pedals and a large LCD screen that tracks your distance, workout duration, row count, stroke rate, calories burned, recovery time, and pulse.
The electronic display rests on an adjustable console that you can adjust to different heights. This rower uses magnetic resistance and comes with 10 resistance levels. Users like how quiet and easily foldable it is.
foldable for easy storage
affordable sticker price for an entry-level rower
adjustable LCD screen
only 10 resistance levels
maximum user weight of 300 pounds
not Bluetooth-enabled
Price:  $
Size:  80 × 23 inches (203.2 × 58.4 cm)
Max weight capacity:  250 pounds (113.6 kg)
Warranty:  3-year limited, 180-day electronics
Resistance type:  magnetic resistance
Display:  LCD monitor
Smart features:  Bluetooth-enabled technology, MyCloudFitness app for on-demand and live classes, smartphone and tablet holder
High quality Bluetooth connectivity and affordable rowing classes make this rowing machine one worth considering. This rower uses magnetic resistance and comes with 14 levels of resistance.
It also includes a basic digital display for keeping an eye on your stats, though you’ll need four AA batteries to keep it powered.
The machine is equipped with a phone holder, so you can stream classes while rowing. You get access to workout programs, including coach-led videos on the MyCloudFitness app, available on Android and iOS.
Through the app, you can also track your workouts and metrics. Plus, you can see your results in real-time while you exercise. The app comes with a free 30-day trial.
affordable price for a quality rower
lower cost for MyCloudFitness app ($14.99 per month) than for some other monthly subscriptions
foldable for easy storage
only 14 resistance levels
maximum user weight of 250 pounds
small (3.5-inch) LCD screen
Price:  $$$
Size:  82 × 22 inches (208.3 × 55.9 cm)
Max weight capacity:  250 pounds (113.6 kg)
Warranty:  1-year frame and components, optional warranty upgrade
Resistance type:  water resistance
Display:  S4 digital monitor
Smart features:  can be used with add-ons such as a Bluetooth ComModule and Ergatta WaterRower Upgrade package
WaterRower  is a Rhode Island-based company that makes indoor rowing machines known for their beautiful wooden design. Each rower has a circular tank at the center that you fill with water. As you row, a cable pulls a paddle inside the tank, which creates resistance.
All WaterRower models have an S4 digital monitor that displays time, distance, speed/intensity, stroke rate, and heart rate (when paired with a  heart rate monitor ).
While the WaterRower is not as high tech as some competitors, the brand offers add-ons to incorporate more tech features, such as the WaterRower Bluetooth ComModule ($59.95).
The WaterRower is also easy to lift up and store in a vertical position, making it a good option for apartments or smaller spaces.
easy to use
stows upright, making it a good option for smaller spaces
can be used with add-ons such as the Bluetooth ComModule and Ergatta WaterRower Upgrade package
expensive
not easy to change resistance level
no built-in touch screen or sound system

Quick comparison of the best rowing machines
Here’s a quick look at how our top picks compare:
Note that the prices listed above are based on the manufacturer’s suggested retail price, or MSRP. The actual price may vary by retailer.

How to choose a rowing machine
Shopping for a rowing machine can feel overwhelming. With so many features, tension types, sizes, and prices, it can be difficult to know where to start.
Here are some tips to help you choose a rowing machine to fit your needs.
Rowing machines use various tension systems — such as magnetic, water-powered, hydraulic, and air-powered systems — to create resistance.
If you want to feel like you’re rowing in the water, opt for a water-powered system.
A magnetic tension system will provide a smooth and quiet ride, and rowers with built-in fans provide wind resistance. Rowing machines that are compact and lower in price typically rely on hydraulic tension.
Rowing machines range in price from $130 to more than $3,000. While a higher price tag doesn’t always equate to better quality, it’s worth your time to consider moderately priced rowers.
Plenty of options average $350–$700 in price. If money isn’t an issue, try one of the top-of-the-line rowers that deliver quality and durability.
Most rowing machines come with an electronic display. Basic rowers tend to have a small display that shows your workout duration, row count, stroke rate, and calories burned.
The pricier, high tech rowers have more elaborate electronic displays, and some even have adjustable touch screens.
Bluetooth compatibility is another feature to consider, along with height and weight limits, on-demand programming, live classes, and multiple resistance levels.
Before purchasing a rowing machine, make sure you have adequate space. If the size of the machine is an issue or you’ll need to move it, focus your search on rowers that are easy to fold and store. Also, look for rowers with built-in transport wheels.

Frequently asked questions
Incorporating cardiovascular exercise into a weight loss plan can be effective for losing weight, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( 1 ).
Performing aerobic workouts with a rowing machine burns calories, boosts heart health, and improves muscular endurance.
According to the American Council on Exercise, a 160-pound person can burn about 254 calories and a 250-pound person can burn about 396 calories in 30 minutes of moderate-intensity rowing ( 2 ).
A rowing machine is an excellent piece of home and exercise equipment.
Although this is not an exhaustive list, using a rowing machine is beneficial because it:
recruits both your upper and lower body to perform the movement
increases your heart rate for cardiovascular health
burns calories
improves muscular endurance
provides a total-body workout that strengthens your quadriceps, hamstrings, glutes, calves, shoulders, lats, biceps, triceps, and core muscles
is a low impact activity
is appropriate for high intensity interval training or steady-state cardio
Aerobic exercise equipment like a rowing machine is often designed for the average user — this does not tend to include very tall people. Finding a rowing machine that accommodates your height may take some time, but some brands do offer larger machines.
The best rowing machine for tall people included in our list is the Concept2 RowErg. It not only accommodates taller heights but also has a maximum user weight of 500 pounds.
The Concept2 RowErg also has two leg height options: standard and tall. The standard leg model comes with a 14-inch seat height, while the taller leg style increases this distance to 20 inches from the floor.
If you’re looking for a rowing machine designed for shorter people, you’re in luck. Unlike other cardio and home exercise equipment that may require you to stand, reach, or step up, most rowing machines can accommodate shorter people.
That said, you will want to look at the seat rail to see how far forward it moves. It should move far enough forward to allow a full range of motion without making you feel like you’re reaching too much.
Also, consider the display and control knobs. Make sure they are accessible and easy to use during a workout.
The standard leg model of the Concept2 RowERG and the Sunny Health and Fitness Magnetic Rowing Machine are good rowing machine options for shorter people.

The bottom line
Rowing machines are an excellent addition to any home gym or fitness studio. Most rowers provide an intense full-body workout that strengthens your upper and lower body muscles and improves your cardiovascular system.
When choosing a rowing machine, consider factors like the tension type, design, resistance levels, and size. For a reasonable price, you can get a top-notch, low impact strength and cardio workout for your entire body.

References:

https://www.healthline.com#overall
https://www.healthline.com#budget
https://www.healthline.com#echelon
https://www.healthline.com#smallspaces
https://www.healthline.com#beginners
https://www.healthline.com#hitech
https://www.healthline.com#oversized
https://www.healthline.com#bluetooth
https://www.healthline.com#waterrower
https://www.healthline.com/health/benefits-of-rowing-machine
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/best-rowing-machine
https://www.healthline.com/health/fitness-exercises/definitive-guide-to-yoga
https://www.healthline.com/health/fitness-exercise/pilates-vs-yoga
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/how-to-start-exercising
https://www.healthline.com/health/fitness/nordictrack-rower
https://www.healthline.com/health/fitness/ifit
https://www.healthline.com/health/fitness/waterrower
https://www.healthline.com/health/fitness/heart-rate-monitor
https://www.cdc.gov/healthyweight/physical_activity/index.html
https://www.acefitness.org/resources/everyone/tools-calculators/physical-activity-calorie-counter/
