Title: Mosaic Foods Review: Frozen, Plant-Based Meals for Individuals and Families

Mosaic Foods delivers fully prepared, plant-based meals for individuals and families. We tried 12 meals to see which, if any, are worth ordering again.

Healthline score: 3.8 out of 5
Mosaic Foods is a frozen meal delivery service that caters to people who follow a vegan diet or are simply looking to eat more plant-based foods.
In addition to single-serve entrees, the company offers a line of family-size meals that come fully assembled and ready to bake in the oven.
After trying more than 25 of the most popular meal delivery services on the market, Kelli McGrane, a Healthline Nutrition editor and registered dietitian, put Mosaic Foods to the (taste) test.
Keep reading to see whether we think these meals deserve a spot in your freezer.
Our tester rated Mosaic Foods across nine categories and allotted points from 0–5. The scores below reflect the average rating for each category.
Overall:  3.8
Sign-up, delivery, and cancellation processes:  4
Meal variety:  2
Nutrition:  5
Sustainability:  4.5
Ingredient quality and freshness:  3.5
Ease of preparation:  4.5
Taste:  3.5
Affordability:  3.5
Learn more about  how we test meal kits .
Disclaimer:   Mosaic Foods provided us with press boxes for free, but our opinions are ours alone and have not been reviewed, approved, or otherwise endorsed by the brand.

Mosaic Foods at a glance
Price:  $5.99–$11.99, depending on item type and box size
Shipping cost:  free for boxes with 12 or 18 items; otherwise $9.99–$19.99
Delivery area:  major metro areas in the eastern and western United States
Meals per week:  6, 12, or 18
Number of servings per meal:  1, 2, or 4
Menu items available:  Veggie Bowls, Soups, Oat Bowls, Pizzas, and Family Meals
generally, nutritionally balanced meals based on whole, minimally processed plant-based ingredients
quick to reheat many entrees in the oven
family-size oven-ready meals available that cost less than $6 per serving
recyclable packaging or packaging made with recycled materials
flavorful meals (though they don’t always taste how you’d expect)
good variety of meals for people without dietary needs (other than plant-based)
not ideal for people with specific dietary needs or restrictions, other than plant-based
watery taste and texture after reheating in some ingredients, particularly the tofu
flavors that don’t always match the package descriptions
sometimes on the pricier side, especially for smaller orders
family meals that can take up to 90 minutes to reheat

Who tried it
Name:   Kelli McGrane, MS, RD
Role:  Healthline Nutrition editor, registered dietitian, cookbook author
Dietary needs and preferences:   flexitarian
Meal-time preferences:  make-ahead, one-pan, and 30-minute weeknight meals, plus recipes that are toddler-friendly
I’ve been using meal delivery services for more than 10 years, testing over 25 services just within the past 3 years.
I first tried Mosaic Foods about 3 years ago for its family-size meals. After seeing so many rave reviews about its single-serving meals, I recently decided to try them as well.

Getting started with Mosaic
Getting started with Mosaic Foods is straightforward and similar to other  prepared meal delivery services .
You’ll first be prompted to enter your email and ZIP code. If Mosaic delivers to your area, you’ll then be able to select your box size and start mixing and matching items from the company’s menu.

How much does Mosaic cost?
Mosaic ranges in price, depending on the items and box size you select.
The company offers three box sizes: 6 items, 12 items, and 18 items. You can save $10 or $20 off your order if you select the 12- or 18-item boxes, respectively.
Here’s a breakdown of the current prices:
Shipping is free for orders of 12 or 18 items. Otherwise, it costs $9.99–$19.99 per order, depending on your location.

Meal variety
Mosaic Foods’ menu doesn’t rotate weekly, though the company does occasionally add new menu items.
While the menu is simple to navigate, it doesn’t allow you to filter by dietary need. Plus, the company doesn’t make it easy to find meals that fit certain dietary needs.
For example, menu items don’t have labels, such as “low carb” or “low sodium,” so you have to view each entree and read its nutrition profile to see whether the recipe fits your dietary needs.
For people who don’t have dietary needs or preferences, other than wanting plant-based meals, Mosaic offers a decent variety of options to choose from.
I was overall impressed by the range of vegetables, grains, plant-based proteins, and flavor combinations offered.
While there are fewer Pizzas and Family Meals to choose from, compared with the Veggie Bowls, the options that are available differ quite a bit from one another.

Nutrition quality
Mosaic meals are bursting with vegetables, whole grains, and  plant-based protein  sources.
The Veggie Bowls also contain at least 10 grams (g) of protein, with many options having 20 g or more per serving. And the Family Meals each contain at least four types of vegetables.
Nutrition facts for each dish are available online and include percent daily values for fats, carbs, and proteins. This makes it easier to tell which meals meet your nutritional needs best.
Still, as noted earlier, the service doesn’t cater to diets other than plant-based. Because of this, it isn’t ideal for people following strict eating patterns, like  keto  or paleo.

Delivery and sustainability
According to the company’s website, Mosaic Foods is committed to  sustainability , and 100% of its packaging is either recyclable or made with recycled materials.
Mosaic also has a helpful page on its website that clearly explains how to recycle each piece of packaging.
In my area, the only non-curbside recyclables were the plastic film and the liners of the meal trays, which I would need to bring to a local recycling center.
My meals arrived on time and in good condition.
While Pizza and Veggie Bowl boxes aren’t large, they can take up a decent amount of freezer space, depending on how many you order.
The Family Meals were a bit larger, though smaller than a standard baking dish of 9 x 13 inches (23 x 33 centimeters).
I found that I could fit only a couple of the boxes in my drawer freezer below my refrigerator without emptying out at least one section of the freezer. Luckily I have a large chest freezer in the garage, which was perfect for housing these meals.

Ingredient quality and freshness
Mosaic meals are crafted with high quality ingredients, including fresh produce, and are free from artificial additives and preservatives.
Compared with many store-bought frozen meals, Mosaic’s entrees did taste fresher and more flavorful.
That said, because the entrees are frozen, some of the ingredients — especially the tofu and vegetables in the Veggie Bowls — had a watery taste and consistency. This made the meals less appealing than entrees from some other prepared meal delivery services, like Sprinly and  CookUnity , which offer fresh meals that are never frozen.

Ease of preparation
Mosaic meals come fully assembled and pre-cooked, so all you have to do is reheat them in the microwave or oven.
The Veggie Bowls are microwaveable. I found the estimated reheating times to be accurate, about 4–5 minutes. I was a bit apprehensive about the plastic film because I’ve tried other prepared meals where the film was nearly impossible to remove without scissors after reheating. But I had zero issues removing the plastic film fully with these meals.
The Pizzas and Family Meals are not microwavable. Instead, they have to be reheated in the oven. While the Pizzas were ready after 15 minutes (the estimated time was 16–20 minutes), the Family Meals took significantly longer than the estimated time. In fact, most of the entrees I tried took 90 minutes to reheat, rather than the estimated 60–75 minutes.

How the meals tasted
Overall, I found Mosaic’s flavors to be hit or miss across the menu, with the Pizzas and Family Meals being my favorite options. Below is a closer look at each category:
I tried 6 Veggie Bowls, including:
BBQ Mac & Cheese
Indian Butter Tofu
Creamy Pesto Cavatappi
Sweet Chili Tofu Bowl
Jerk Lentil Plantain Bowl
Green Curry Noodles
I was overall impressed by the generous amount and types of vegetables included in each dish. I also liked that the menu had a variety of plant-based protein options.
Texture-wise, I really enjoyed the grains and noodles. I found most of the vegetables to be on the softer side, though not mushy. However, some vegetables, especially the green beans, tasted a bit watery after being reheated.
The  tofu  was the biggest disappointment. I found the tofu to have an almost sponge-like consistency that was very watery when I bit into it. I think this might be due to the tofu being roasted and then frozen. I’d be curious to try a dish with steamed tofu instead to see if it would hold up better.
As for flavors, all of the dishes I tried were flavorful, though the flavors didn’t always match my expectations.
For example, the BBQ Mac & Cheese didn’t have a traditional smoky, slightly sweet barbecue flavor. It also wasn’t very creamy or cheesy. Instead, it was quite spicy and had a thinner sauce. Again, I enjoyed it, but it wasn’t what I was expecting.
I tried two pizzas:
Spinach Artichoke
Roasted Grape and Butternut Squash
Unlike the Veggie Bowls, which contain 1 serving, the pizzas contain 2 servings each.
When I opened the first pizza box, I was surprised by how small the pizza was. However, once I started eating it, I fully understood why: the pizzas are very rich (in a good way), and I did find that I had about 1/3 of a pizza left to munch on the next day.
Out of all the items I tried, the Spinach Artichoke Pizza was my favorite.
I tried four options:
BBQ “Meatloaf” & Sweet Potato Mash
Veggie Pot Pie
Penne alla Vodka
Italian “Sausage” & Pumpkin Lasagna
The Veggie Pot Pie and Penne alla Vodka were my two favorites. Both had really good flavors and, while the textures were a bit soggy, the meals were still overall quite satisfying.
The BBQ “Meatloaf” had a good flavor — the mashed sweet potatoes, in particular, were great — but the loaf itself was a bit too dry.
The lasagna was my least favorite dish, as the seasonings were too overpowering for my taste.

Is Mosaic foods worth it?
Because of its creative flavor combinations and focus on high quality, plant-based ingredients, I really wanted to like Mosaic more than I did.
While the meals were flavorful and packed with good-for-you ingredients, I didn’t like the texture of many of the items I tried. Additionally, the actual taste of the meals didn’t always match how the flavors were described on the packaging.
But it’s important to note that after doing a quick search online, it’s clear that many reviewers enjoy Mosaic Foods and highly recommend the service to others.
Overall, if you’re looking for freezer-friendly, plant-based meals and don’t have any other dietary restrictions, I do think it could be worth trying Mosaic Foods — especially since the company offers a satisfaction guarantee.
Just be aware that it might not be the best fit if you have specific dietary needs or dislike softer textures.

Alternatives
Mosaic isn’t the only company serving up plant-based, prepared meals. Here’s a quick look at how Mosaic Foods compares with a few other prepared meal delivery services:

Frequently asked questions
While Mosaic tries to use  organic ingredients  when possible, many of the ingredients are conventional. You can view which ingredients are organic by looking at each entree’s ingredient list.
While Mosaic tries to use  organic ingredients  when possible, many of the ingredients are conventional. You can view which ingredients are organic by looking at each entree’s ingredient list.
Yes — in fact, Mosaic meals arrive frozen and should be stored in your freezer, where they’ll stay fresh for at least 3 months.
Yes — in fact, Mosaic meals arrive frozen and should be stored in your freezer, where they’ll stay fresh for at least 3 months.

The bottom line
Mosaic Foods offers a convenient way to stock your freezer with healthy plant-based meals.
Plus, unlike many other prepared meal delivery services, which only offer single-serve meals, Mosaic’s menu includes a variety of oven-ready, family-size meals.
However, as our tester noted, if you’re picky about textures or have other dietary needs, Mosaic may not be the best fit.

References:

https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/how-we-test-meal-kits
https://www.healthline.com/authors/kelli-mcgrane
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/flexitarian-diet-guide
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/best-prepared-meal-delivery-service
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/protein-for-vegans-vegetarians
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/keto-meal-delivery
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/sustainable-meal-delivery
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/cookunity-reviews
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/what-is-tofu
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/what-is-organic-food
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/what-is-organic-food
