Title: What Is a Low FODMAP Meal Plan?

Creating a meal plan that contains a lot of low FODMAP foods is a great way to help manage your irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) symptoms at home.
Every year, tens of millions of people in the United States deal with the symptoms of IBS. IBS is characterized by frequent bouts of constipation, diarrhea, or both, with pain, bloating, and other uncomfortable digestive symptoms.
While there’s currently no cure for IBS, treatment can help people with the condition manage their symptoms and prevent flares. One approach is the low FODMAP diet, which involves limiting or avoiding certain types of undigestible carbohydrates.
Below, we’ll share more on what FODMAPs are and how to create a low FODMAP meal plan, with breakfast, lunch, and dinner ideas you can try today.

How to create a low FODMAP meal plan
Before you dive into creating your first low FODMAP meal plan, it can be helpful to understand exactly  what FODMAPs are .
“FODMAP” stands for “fermentable oligosaccharides, disaccharides, monosaccharides, and polyols”. In other words, FODMAPs are a type of sugar that our bodies  can’t easily digest , so they ferment and cause gas, pain, and other uncomfortable symptoms.
High FODMAP foods  contain lots of these sugars, which means they’re more likely to ferment in the gut. If you’re creating a low FODMAP meal plan, these are the ingredients and foods you’ll want to try to avoid.
Some of the most common high FODMAP foods include:
apples, blueberries, cherries, grapes, peaches, pears, raspberries, and watermelon
asparagus, broccoli, cabbage, cauliflower, garlic, mushrooms, and onions
beans, black-eyed peas, chickpeas, lentils, red kidney beans, and soybeans
wheat, bread, most cereals, crackers, pasta, tortillas, barley, and rye
most yogurts, soft cheese, sour cream, ice cream, and whey protein
some artificial and natural sweeteners, fruit juices, kombucha, and some plant milks
On the opposite end,  low FODMAP foods  contain much lower amounts of FODMAPS, which means they’re less likely to ferment and cause digestive symptoms. With a low FODMAP diet, you’ll want to incorporate  more of these foods  into your meal plan.
Some of the most common low FODMAP foods include:
meat, fish, and meat and fish products without high FODMAP ingredients
eggs, lactose-free dairy products, hard cheeses, and aged soft cheeses
certain nuts and seeds, including pine nuts, macadamia nuts, and peanuts
cantaloupe, grapefruit, honeydew melon, kiwi, citrus fruits, and strawberries
bell peppers, bok choy, carrots, celery, cucumber, green beans, kale, lettuce, parsnips, potatoes, spinach, squash, sweet potatoes, tomatoes, yams, and zucchini
corn, oats, quinoa, and rice
fats, oils, herbs, spices, maple syrup, and stevia
Once you have a list of foods to base your meal plan around and foods to avoid, the next step is to  start meal planning .
The meal planning process usually looks like this:
First, check your fridge, your pantry, and recipe books or websites for inspiration.
Next, choose your recipes and create your shopping list.
Finally, shop for the ingredients, prepare and store your meals, and enjoy.

Recipe ideas for low FODMAP meal planning
Below, you’ll find some  low FODMAP recipe ideas  that you can use to build a meal plan so that you can  start meal prepping  today.
When it comes to your first meal of the day, a few simple substitutes can turn an everyday breakfast recipe into a low FODMAP alternative:
pancakes or waffles with oat flour, lactose-free milk, and maple syrup
egg white omelet with spinach, bell peppers, and cheddar cheese
eggs scrambled with aged soft cheese, with a side of potatoes and bacon
lactose-free or oat milk yogurt topped with fruit and homemade granola
If you’re looking for lunch and dinner ideas to add to your meal plan, try pairing different low FODMAP proteins, vegetables, and grains:
lettuce wraps with ground beef, carrots, and zucchini, with a side of white rice
kale and spinach salad with baked salmon, roasted vegetables, and homemade dressing
carnitas tacos with corn tortillas, lettuce, tomatoes, cheese, and plant-based sour cream
chicken quesadillas made with gluten-free wraps and topped with homemade salsa
grilled chicken with a side of mashed sweet potatoes and roasted summer squash
quinoa bowl with marinated firm tofu and sauteed bok choy, carrots, and zucchini
Even if you’re following a low FODMAP meal plan, there are still plenty of snack and dessert options you can enjoy:
cottage cheese topped with fruit
sourdough toast with peanut butter
sliced meat, cheese, and gluten-free crackers
homemade muffins with fruit and nuts
flourless or oat flour cookies, cakes, or bars
coconut milk ice cream or fruit sorbet bars

Sticking to your low FODMAP meal plan when dining out
Fast food and restaurant food are often high in FODMAPs, which can make dining out difficult when you’re following a low FODMAP meal plan. Still, that doesn’t mean that you can’t find low FODMAP foods when you’re dining out.
Before you leave the house, consider looking at menu options ahead of time. By checking the menu before you go, you’ll be able to familiarize yourself with some of the low FODMAP food choices available to you.
Once you’re at the restaurant or establishment, don’t hesitate to ask questions about the menu options. Let the server know that you have dietary concerns and will need to avoid some things. Sometimes, you may even be able to make adjustments, like asking for dressing on the side or exchanging a high FODMAP ingredient for a lower FODMAP one.
You may want to look for restaurants that offer plenty of gluten- and dairy-free options or those that can make food allergen-safe.

Takeaway
FODMAPs are present in a wide variety of fruits, vegetables, proteins, and grains, both in high and low amounts.
Creating a low FODMAP meal plan involves crafting your daily and weekly recipes around low FODMAP foods while limiting high FODMAP choices.
If you’ve been wondering about the benefits of a low FODMAP diet for your  IBS symptoms , reach out to a doctor, gastroenterologist, or registered dietitian who specializes in low FODMAP diets for more guidance on where to start.

References:

https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/fodmaps
https://www.healthline.comhttps://gi.org/topics/low-fodmap-diet/
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/foods-high-in-fodmaps
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/fodmaps-101#low-fodmap-foods
https://www.monashfodmap.com/about-fodmap-and-ibs/
https://www.healthline.com/health/nutrition/how-to-meal-plan
https://www.healthline.com/health/22-ibs-friendly-recipes
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/how-to-meal-prep
https://www.healthline.com/health/irritable-bowel-syndrome