Title: HelloFresh Review: Tester Feedback After 4 Months of Meals

Is HelloFresh worth it? Here’s our candid HelloFresh review after three testers and two dietitians evaluated the taste, price, and ingredient quality of the meals.

Healthline meal delivery score: 4.2 out of 5

HelloFresh is a popular meal kit service known for providing nutritious, well-balanced meals suitable for singles and families alike. While it doesn’t cater to as many specialty diets as some other similar services, it stands out as a solid option for healthy home cooking.
Healthline editors  Candice Abellon  and  Kelli McGrane , MS, RD, and writer  SaVanna Shoemaker , MS, RDN, LD, have all tried HelloFresh and share their experiences with the service below.
Here’s more about how HelloFresh works, the cost, the food, and how it stacks up against the competition.

HelloFresh, explained
HelloFresh is a meal delivery service that offers pre-portioned ingredients and step-by-step recipe cards designed to help simplify meal prep. By offering meal kits rather than fully  prepared meals , it is particularly popular among aspiring home chefs.
The service provides six options to meet different dietary preferences:
Meat & Veggies:  a variety of meals that include meat and vegetables
Veggie:  plant-based meals that are  vegetarian  but not necessarily vegan
Family Friendly:  quick, easy-to-prepare, kid-approved options
Fit & Wholesome:  meals that have around 650 calories or less per serving
Under 20 minutes:  meals that can be cooked in 20 minutes or less
Pescatarian:  meals featuring seafood but not red meat or poultry
You select recipes from a weekly rotating menu, and the full meal kits are then shipped directly to your home.
These deliveries contain mostly recyclable, compostable, or reusable materials. HelloFresh says it’s also dedicated to reducing its carbon footprint through responsible sourcing, streamlined supply chain management, and offsetting its carbon emissions.

Pros and cons
more convenient than meal planning or grocery shopping
easy to start, cancel, and modify your subscription
option to mix and match meals from each menu
offers a good variety of flavorful, easy-to-prepare meals
offers vegetarian, pescatarian, and reduced-calorie meal plans
ingredients typically arrive fresh and in good condition
suitable for families with young kids, as well as for couples and singles
offers specialty menus each month
option to swap out sides or proteins on certain meals
priced similarly to, or lower than, many competitors
may not be as convenient as meal delivery services that eliminate the need to cook
no exclusive gluten- or allergen-free meal options
not a good option for some diets, including keto, paleo, and vegan
some meals could use more vegetables or offer a greater variety of flavors or textures
may not be a good option for more adventurous eaters
meal options can get repetitive or feel too similar after several months of subscribing
reports of occasional issues with missing, damaged, or spoiled ingredients
$10.99 shipping fee per box

Who tried it
Role:  Healthline writer, registered dietitian
Dietary needs and preferences:  low carb options
Meal-time preferences:  family-friendly meals and plenty of variety
I’m a registered dietitian and a mom of two young children, so I’m always looking for ways to streamline meal planning and prep while still getting healthy meals on the table.
Over a year, I’ve tested almost every meal kit available. After trying so many services, I’ve become more aware of their true pros and cons and understand what a customer should expect from the experience.
Role:  Healthline Nutrition editor, registered dietitian, cookbook author
Dietary needs and preferences:   flexitarian
Meal-time preferences:  make-ahead, one-pan, and 30-minute weeknight meals and recipes that are toddler-friendly
I’ve been using meal delivery services for more than 10 years, testing 25 services just within 3 years.
I first tried HelloFresh after my mother-in-law gifted me a free box. For a few years since that first trial, I’ve used HelloFresh off and on to take a break from meal planning. While sometimes I only use it for a few weeks, I used the service for four straight months.
Role:  Healthline editor
Dietary needs and preferences:  dairy-free, less red meat
Meal-time preferences:  easy weeknight meals
I’ve used HelloFresh off and on for years by myself, as a couple, and for a larger household while working full-time. My time and mental energy are the resources that I’m often trying to manage the most.

How HelloFresh works
Getting started with HelloFresh is simple. In fact, all of our testers rated it a 5 out of 5 for ease of sign-up, delivery, and cancellation.
First, you’ll select your desired meal plan and size. Regardless of your chosen plan, you can always choose recipes from other plans.
Next, you’ll enter your payment details and select your first week of meals.
Once you have entered your information, you’ll be assigned a weekly delivery day. Then you can choose your meals.
Within each category, there’s room for customization, such as avoiding beef,  pork , or seafood. You can also swap certain sides, such as broccoli or potatoes. These swaps add $0.99–$1.99 per serving.
If needed, you can change your upcoming delivery or skip a week through your online account. You can also cancel your subscription by navigating to your account settings at least five days before your next delivery.

Is HelloFresh eco-friendly?
HelloFresh received a 4 out of 5 during scoring because of its  packaging  and environmental initiatives.
HelloFresh deliveries contain mostly recyclable, compostable, or reusable materials. For example, the paper bags that ingredients arrive in can be added to your compost, the ice packs are reusable, and the cardboard is recyclable.
The company says it’s also dedicated to reducing its carbon footprint through responsible sourcing, streamlined supply chain management, and offsetting its carbon emissions.

The food
“I appreciated that HelloFresh’s menu rotates weekly, and I enjoyed the occasional specialty menus, like the Better Than Takeout and Asian American and Pacific Islander Heritage Month recipes.”
— Kelli McGrane
With a rotating menu of more than 30 weekly options, HelloFresh is an appealing choice if you’re looking to mix up your weekly meal planning. Our testers appreciated this variety, especially the wide range of recipes with simple labels to help you easily find what works.
However, as all of our testers noted, if you follow some dietary plans, like low carb, keto, or paleo, you might find the options limited.
Additionally, McGrane noted that the meals can eventually start to feel repetitive, especially if you’re using the service for a longer period of time.
Meal variety   Tester scores (out of 5):
Tester #1:  4.5
Tester #2:  4
Tester #3:  4
“Most of the meals are very well balanced, including a protein, starch, and vegetable. HelloFresh also clearly labels food allergens for each meal.”
— SaVanna Shoemaker
HelloFresh aims to make healthy eating easier by providing well-balanced meals featuring a variety of nutrient-dense ingredients, such as vegetables, whole grains, and lean proteins.
The service also labels items suitable for several healthy eating patterns—including Mediterranean, vegetarian, and carb-smart options—and offers a Fit & Wholesome menu, which highlights selections that are lower in calories.
However, McGrane noted that some meals are low in vegetables. According to Abellon, it might also not be the best choice if you follow a vegan or dairy-free diet.
Nutritional quality   Tester scores (out of 5):
Tester #1:  5
Tester #2:  4
Tester #3:  4
“I’ve been using HelloFresh off and on for a few years. The vegetables have been fresh and good quality for the most part, with only one or two sad carrots.”
— Candice Abellon, Healthline senior editor
HelloFresh is based on the idea that if you provide people with simple but flavorful recipes and high quality ingredients, they’ll love eating healthy, home-cooked meals.
Depending on the specific menu you choose from, your meal kit may include vegetables, proteins, grains, and other ingredients like herbs, sauces, or other seasonings to add extra flavor.
Our testers found the ingredient quality to be good overall. However, HelloFresh loses points for not having the option to pay for higher-quality meats or organic produce.
Also, while produce mostly comes in good shape, it’s not uncommon to get some items that you wouldn’t likely choose from a market. For example, Shoemaker mentioned wilted green onions, McGrane received pre-cut kale past prime, and Abellon experienced a few “sad carrots.”
Ingredient quality and freshness   Tester scores (out of 5) :
Tester #1:  3.5
Tester #2:  3.5
Tester #3:  4
“My meals were straightforward to prepare. They required some basic slicing and chopping for the vegetables, but I don’t think you’d need special cooking skills. With that said, I feel like it always takes me or my partner a little longer to prepare meals than the estimated total time.”
— Candice Abellon
With simple, step-by-step ingredients and pre-portioned ingredients, HelloFresh claims to offer members a fun cooking experience to help simplify their weekly meal prep. But does it actually deliver?
According to our testers, the service stands out for its beginner-friendly recipes, which are suitable for newbies and experienced home cooks alike. While some dishes may require some multitasking, no advanced techniques or specialty tools are required.
Additionally, the HelloFresh menu shows the difficulty level and estimated time required for each recipe. However, Abellon noted that the recipes took longer to prepare than the estimated time.
McGrane and Shoemaker also mentioned that there’s typically quite a big pile of pots and pans to clean up after each meal. However, HelloFresh also offers some “Easy Cleanup” recipes that use less kitchen equipment.
Preparation Tester scores (out of 5):
Tester #1:  4
Tester #2:  4.5
Tester #3:  3
“Overall, I found HelloFresh’s meals to be well seasoned, family friendly, and filling. I also appreciated that most recipes contained a good variety of textures and ingredients. [But] after subscribing for 4 months, many of the recipes started to taste the same. I also would have liked the service to introduce me to ingredients that I otherwise wouldn’t have tried myself.”
— Kelli McGrane
HelloFresh is particularly popular for its tasty recipes, and most meals include a variety of herbs, spices, and seasonings intended to maximize flavor.
All our testers reported that HelloFresh meals were a hit in their households.
For example, the Vegan Thai Coconut Curry Tofu was a favorite for McGrane and her family. McGrane said that the meal hit just the right balance between spicy and sweet.
Meanwhile, Abellon said that she particularly enjoyed the Jammy Onion & Brussels Sprout Cavatappi, which featured a good blend of ingredients and a nice crunch.
Shoemaker said she started incorporating sauces and meal combinations inspired by HelloFresh into her regular routine, including mushroom sauce like the one from the Cheesy Smothered Mushroom Chicken.
That being said, McGrane noted that if you’re a longtime subscriber, the meals may start to feel repetitive. And recipes mostly stick to tried-and-true flavor combinations and ingredients, which may not satisfy more adventurous eaters.
Taste Tester scores:
Tester #1:  5
Tester #2:  4
Tester #3:  4.5

Brand reputation and customer reviews
Customers are generally happy with HelloFresh. In cases where an order or its ingredients have been an issue, reviewers say HelloFresh’s customer service is extremely helpful and responsive.
According to HelloFresh reviews on Yelp and Reddit, the meals taste good, but the ingredients can be fairly basic, the recipes may feel complicated, or the ingredients may arrive damaged.
Other common customer complaints involve missing ingredients, difficulty canceling the service, and produce arriving in poor condition.

Who is HelloFresh best for?
HelloFresh may be for you if you don’t have any specific dietary needs and are interested in learning to cook.
It might also be a good fit for families with children or picky eaters, as there are plenty of family-friendly options to choose from.
On the other hand, you may want to opt for another service if you’re following a specific diet, such as keto or paleo. People with food allergies or strict dietary requirements—including those following a vegan or gluten-free diet—might also have a hard time finding meals that meet their needs.
Additionally, because HelloFresh uses mostly conventional ingredients, people who prefer eating organic might want to consider an  organic meal delivery  service.

How HelloFresh compares
There are other meal kit companies offering fresh, pre-portioned ingredients to help you prepare more healthy meals at home. Here’s a quick look at how they compare:
*Except for  Home Chef, which charges $9.99 to $11.99   for shipping, the services listed in the table above cost $10.99 for shipping.

Frequently asked questions
HelloFresh only provides meal kits, which may not be as convenient as similar services that offer fully prepared meals. There are also limited options for those following certain diet plans, and the meals may eventually start to feel repetitive over time.
HelloFresh only provides meal kits, which may not be as convenient as similar services that offer fully prepared meals. There are also limited options for those following certain diet plans, and the meals may eventually start to feel repetitive over time.
HelloFresh can be a convenient and time-saving way to enjoy more healthy meals at home, which might make it worth the price for some people. However, if you’re on a tight budget, grocery shopping and preparing your own recipes yourself might be a better alternative.
HelloFresh can be a convenient and time-saving way to enjoy more healthy meals at home, which might make it worth the price for some people. However, if you’re on a tight budget, grocery shopping and preparing your own recipes yourself might be a better alternative.
Many HelloFresh meals are nutritionally balanced and feature a good source of protein, carbs, and healthy fats. That being said, some meals are high in calories, carbs, or fat, so it’s important to read the nutrition facts for each meal to see whether it fits your needs.
Additionally, the service might not be a good option if you prefer eating organic foods or have specific dietary restrictions.
Many HelloFresh meals are nutritionally balanced and feature a good source of protein, carbs, and healthy fats. That being said, some meals are high in calories, carbs, or fat, so it’s important to read the nutrition facts for each meal to see whether it fits your needs.
Additionally, the service might not be a good option if you prefer eating organic foods or have specific dietary restrictions.

The bottom line
HelloFresh is a moderately priced meal kit service that delivers appealing recipes focusing on fresh ingredients, simple cooking methods, and bold flavors.
It’s a solid option if you enjoy cooking but also value the convenience of a meal kit.
While HelloFresh is more affordable than many competitors, including  Sunbasket  and  Green Chef , it’s not a great fit if you have strict dietary needs or preferences.
Overall, we recommend HelloFresh if you’re looking for easy and flavorful meals delivered to your doorstep.

References:

https://www.healthline.com/authors/candice-abellon
https://www.healthline.com/authors/kelli-mcgrane
https://www.healthline.com/authors/savanna-shoemaker
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/best-prepared-meal-delivery-service
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/vegetarian-diet-plan
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/flexitarian-diet-guide
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/foods/pork
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/eco-friendly-food-packaging
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/organic-meal-delivery
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/hello-fresh-vs-sunbasket
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/hello-fresh-vs-green-chef
