Title: Tested and Bested: 14 Top Punching Bags

Whether you’re looking for something to punch, kick, tone, practice, or increase speed on, we have vetted, tested, and rounded up our top choices, including Century, Ringside, Quiet Punch, and Everlast.

A quick look at the best punching bags
Best overall:   PEXMOR Freestanding Heavy Bag with Suction Cup Base  |  Skip to review
Best for beginners:   FITVEN Freestanding Punching Bag with Boxing Gloves  |  Skip to review
Best packaged deal:  RDX Anti-Swing Punching Bag  |  Skip to review
Best hanging heavy bag:   Outslayer 100-Pound Heavy Bag  |  Skip to review
Best for punching and kicking:   Ringside 100-Pound Muay Thai Heavy Bag  |  Skip to review
Best portable:   Everlast HydroStrike Water Bag  |  Skip to review
Best for small spaces:   Quiet Punch Smart Punching Bag  |  Skip to review
Best for wall mounting:   Title Boxing Wall Mount Menace Training Bag  |  Skip to review
Most lifelike:   Century B.O.B. Freestanding Training Dummy  |  Skip to review
Best adjustable:   Century Original Wavemaster Freestanding Heavy Bag  |  Skip to review
Best hybrid fill:  MaxxMMA Water/Air Heavy Bag  |  Skip to review
Best wrecking ball:   Pro Impact Double-Ended Punching Bag  |  Skip to review
Best for people 5 ft and under:   Ringside 40-Pound Heavy Bag with Gloves and Wraps  |  Skip to review
Best under $100:   Tech Tools Punching Bag with Stand  |  Skip to review
A punching bag for training or cathartic release can be a game-changer.
If you want to continue your boxing training at home, you’ll need key pieces of equipment — the main one being a punching bag.

What are the different types of punching bags?
The hanging heavy bag is by far the most popular punching bag used in boxing because it allows you to practice a wide range of punches, kicks, knees, and other boxing movements.
These bags are typically cylindrical and 4–5 feet (ft) [121.9–152.4 centimeters (cm)] tall, and they may weigh 40–100 pounds (lb) [18.1–45.4 kilograms (kg)] or more.
They’re usually designed to hang from a stable surface with straps or chains.
Beginners should select a lighter bag, while advanced trainees may want a heavier bag that can absorb powerful punches and kicks.
These bags are highly versatile and can be suitable for a number of combat sports, including:
boxing
kickboxing
MMA
Muay Thai
Longer heavy bags are traditionally used for combat sports that include a kicking component.
One major requirement of a heavy bag is a sturdy place to hang it. However, not everyone can go to the trouble of permanently installing one.
Freestanding options are one alternative. In these models, a heavy base or suction cups hold the bag in place, which means you don’t need to drill holes in a ceiling or wall. Plus, you can move the bag around as you please.
Freestanding bags are best for traditional boxing, as they have a base that often gets in the way of kicking movements.
These bags are suitable for all levels of experience, though a heavier base is recommended for more advanced trainees to prevent unwanted movement.
While heavy bags are the gold standard in boxing training, not everyone has the space to hang one.
Teardrop or wrecking ball punching bags are an excellent alternative to heavy bags when space is limited because they allow for similar striking patterns but usually take up less than half the space.
These bags are often filled with water or air. This makes them quite portable — you can empty them before moving them.
Some versions can even be mounted in a doorway, allowing for ultimate portability.
Bags of this style are best suited for boxing training because they are usually too high for most people to kick.
In addition, because of their smaller size and rapid movement, these bags are often used for speed training.

How we chose the best punching bags
When setting out to find the best punching bags on the market, we considered the following factors:
Materials and quality:  Punching bags need to be able to hold up to strong punches and kicks, so quality really matters.
Ease of setup, use, and portability:  We included hanging, freestanding, and compact options to help you find what works best for your space.
Size and weight:  Beginners may prefer a lighter bag, while advanced trainees will probably need a heavier one.
Price:  We included a range of options to suit a variety of budgets.
Customer reviews:  All the bags on our list have mostly positive reviews.
Warranty:  We selected bags with a warranty or return policy.
Vetting:  The punching bags on our list have been vetted to ensure that they align with Healthline’s brand integrity standards and approach to well-being. You can read more about  our vetting process .
Here are the top 14 punching bags of 2023.
General price ranges with dollar signs ($–$$$) are indicated below. One dollar sign means the product is considered rather affordable, whereas three dollar signs indicate a higher price.
List prices for these punching bags range from $69–$350.
Pricing guide:
$  = under $100
$$  = $100–$200
$$$  = over $200
Note that final prices may vary depending on shipping costs, available discounts, and where you shop.

Healthline’s picks for the best punching bags
Price:  $$
Materials: Bag: 2 millimeter thick polyurethane blasting surface made of faux leather Base: round tire, armor base tank with 12 strong suction cups
Bag: 2 millimeter thick polyurethane blasting surface made of faux leather
Base: round tire, armor base tank with 12 strong suction cups
Fill:  sand (preferable), water
Weight:  37.6 lb (17 kg) unfilled, 220 lb (100 kg) filled
Height:  69.6 inches (in) ( 175 cm) tall
Warranty:  365-day return with 100% of materials returned (original packaging, instructions, and accessories)
The PEXMOR Freestanding bag is a full-size punching bag with sand or water-filled base. It comes in two sizes: adult and child.
The state-of-the-art structure features a 12-suction cup armor base and a steel-enforced pole attached to the bottom of the base to provide additional stability.
Furthermore, the bag is equipped with a multi-layered cushion that is made of strong steel shock-absorbing springs that make it significantly less noisy than its competitors and a good choice for multilevel or shared home use.
This bag can be used for karate, boxing, and kickboxing.
Since the bag is freestanding, the setup is pretty straightforward. The most challenging part is filling it with water or sand, as noted by our hands-on reviewer.
Healthline Multimedia Editor II Kristin Currin-Sheehan had her teenage son, Garrett, test the bag.
He said that the product was easy to set up but took a while, as the base is somewhat challenging to fill.
“I found that sand may be better between the two options of what to fill the base with. I filled the base of mine with water, and not only is it susceptible to leaks, but if you hit hard enough, you may knock it over.” That said, he found the product to be reliable and a good option for those who live in small spaces and still want a boxing bag.
When researching free-standing punching bags, this seems to be the sturdiest. The metal reinforcements and suction cup technology allow for a better-uninterrupted boxing workout. All-in-all, the bag rates well on Amazon, with a 4.4-star average rating with almost 600 reviews to date.
good training tools for beginner youth, smaller adults
sturdy high quality system
great for apartments, small home gyms, garages
base can be unstable with just sand
suction cups may not stick to the floor and hold the base
assembly issues
Price:  $$
Materials:  synthetic leather
Fill:  foam
Weight:  205 lb (93 kg) when filled with sand, 160 lb (72.6 kg) with water
Height:  70 in (177.8 cm)
Warranty:  1 year
The FITVEN freestanding bag is an excellent option for beginners because of its manageable size and weight.
Considering that the bag is freestanding, no mounting is required, and setup is fairly straightforward.
The base can be filled with sand or water, though most users recommend using sand since it’s a bit heavier. Suction cups on the bottom provide additional support.
Many reviewers mention that this bag’s stability makes it a good option for bigger and stronger individuals. Overall, it rates well with reviewers, averaging 4.5 stars on Amazon with almost 4,800 reviews logged.
As a bonus, the bag comes with gloves.
easy setup
comes with gloves
full size
cumbersome to move once filled
more expensive than other options
no customer service
Price:  $$
Materials:  synthetic leather and nylon straps
Fill:  shredded textile, fabric
Weight:  37–44 lb (17–20 kg) [4 ft], 42–51 lb (19–23 kg) [5 ft]
Height:  48 in
Warranty:  30-day return or replacement
This set includes a full-size heavy bag, a wall mount, chains, and gloves — everything you need to get started with your training.
It’s also available in both 4 ft and 5 ft versions.
The bag is lighter than most hanging heavy bags, making it a good option for beginners and a little more budget-friendly. If you need to adjust the weight, you can easily add or remove the filling using the zip closure at the top of the bag.
While it requires some installation tools, users find it fairly stable and easy to hang. While it hasn’t been reviewed extensively, the roughly 30 reviews it has to date offer an impressive average of around 4.8 stars.
This bag also has an anti-swing anchor to prevent it from swinging too much when hitting it.
comes with several accessories
available in two colors
requires drilling for installation
extra cost for shipping
Price:  $$$
Materials:  vinyl
Fill:  100% cotton fabric filling
Weight:  100 lb (45.4 kg)
Height:  55 in (139.7 cm)
Warranty:  10 years
The Outslayer 100-Pound Heavy Bag is top rated among professionals and boxing enthusiasts.
The bag comes pre-filled from the factory with a dense fabric to prevent settling during use.
Though this bag has a slightly higher price tag than some others, the 10-year warranty may be of interest to some buyers.
Based on almost 1,000 reviews on Amazon, the Outslayer bag maintains a 4.9-star rating. It is a high quality option for even the most advanced home exercisers.
It’s important to note that you’ll need additional hardware to hang it. Also, this bag doesn’t come with a bottom loop for attaching a bag anchor, which could help reduce unwanted swinging. You can add one on Outslayer’s website for an additional fee.
full-size heavy bag
fabric-filled
highly rated and reviewed
extra cost for bottom loop
more expensive than other options
not good for beginners use
rings make a sound when bag is moving
Price:  $$$
Materials :  synthetic leather
Fill:  natural and synthetic fabric
Weight:  105 lb (47.6 kg)
Height:  72 in (182.9 cm)
Warranty:  30-day return or replacement
At 6 ft (182.9 cm) tall, the Ringside 100-Pound Muay Thai Heavy Bag is significantly longer than your typical heavy bag.
This makes accommodating anything from low kicks to high punches quite versatile.
The nylon straps with D-rings and chains make for a secure hanging solution, but it doesn’t have a bottom loop for attaching a floor anchor.
With almost 800 reviews, this bag has 4.7 out of 5 stars on Amazon, and many reviewers mention that its quality comes at a reasonable price.
Keep in mind that you’ll need additional hardware to properly hang the bag.
extra length for added versatility
durable
requires additional hardware to hang
no floor anchor to prevent swinging
Price:  $$
Materials:  plastic
Fill:  water
Weight:  100 lb (45.4 kg) when filled with 12 gallons or 54.6 liters (L) of water
Height:  28 in (71.1 cm)
Warranty:  2 years
The Everlast HydroStrike Water Bag is a great option for home gyms with limited space.
It’s filled with water and weighs about 100 lb (45.4 kg) at full capacity.
The bag can be quickly emptied, so it’s easy to move around or store.
While it’s a bit smaller than a full-size heavy bag, it provides similar resistance to many larger bags, which makes it suitable for boxing and certain martial arts.
With almost 1,400 reviews on Amazon, the bag also has a 4.5-star average rating. Reviewers note that the sensation of hitting a water-filled bag is easier on the joints and offers a satisfying sensation.
This bag comes equipped with a chain, so all you need is a hook to hang it from and you’re all set.
very portable
easy to fill
adjustable height
different striking feel than a traditional punching bag
potential for leaking
Price:  $$$
Materials:  plastic and foam
Weight:  not specified
Height:  not specified
Warranty:  1 year limited
The Quiet Punch Smart Punching Bag provides a solution for home gyms:
in small spaces
in multi-family units
with thin walls
This bag is mounted in a doorway using  industrial-strength elastic  bands, so it doesn’t take up much room. This setup also helps reduce noise, making it a viable option for apartments and other small spaces.
It also includes sensors that track your punches, and the Quiet Punch Play app tracks your data and provides workout routines.
Quiet Punch also makes a version of this bag  without punch tracking  for $100 less.
Reviewers find that this bag provides a solid workout and is easy to use. It has almost 300 reviews on the brand’s website, with an average of 4.9 stars.
Garrett, Currin-Sheehan’s teenage son, also tested the Quiet Punch Smart Punching Bag.
“The app offers lots of features, such as tutorials, workouts, and even a feature that allows you to see how hard you punch. Right off the bat, I noticed that the Quiet Punch is very light and when you’re punching it, it feels like you aren’t hitting anything. The product doesn’t offer any resistance when in use, but is great for timing, similar to a speed bag,” he shares.
Garrett also adds that, while it’s a good product for people who live in apartments or as an extra tool for boxers who also use a conventional punching bag, it’s challenging to set up. While it may be marketed as a travel-friendly option, it’s better suited as an option you can set up and leave in place.
much quieter than other options
Quiet Punch Play app available for workout data and routines
fairly expensive
smaller than other bags
Price:  $$
Materials:  leather cover, steel frame
Fill:  mixed density foam
Weight:  approximately 25 lb (11.34 kg)
Height:  24 in (61 cm)
Warranty:  120 days limited
The Title Boxing Wall Mount Menace Training Bag is a good solution for individuals who have limited space and are unable to hang a traditional bag.
The wall mount bag can be affixed to wood studs or masonry walls, making it a good option for home-based garage gyms or those setting up an outdoor gym space. It may not be a good option for those with thin or shared walls, like in apartment complexes or condos.
The bag is compact, just 24 in tall by 16 in wide, and has a max depth of 16 inches. Built with mixed density foam and leather outer, the materials are high quality and designed to last. The frame is made of steel, but the mounting hardware must be purchased separately.
Given the compact size, it’s great for boxing practice and fitness activities but less suitable for martial arts, including kicking.
Based on just three reviews on the brand’s website, the product has a 4.3 star average rating.
compact size
high quality materials
good option for garage gyms and small spaces
not suitable for MMA-style training
doesn’t include mounting hardware
Price:  $$$
Materials:  high strength vinyl
Fill:  high density urethane foam
Weight:  up to 270 lb (122.5 kg)
Height:  60–78 in (152.4–198.1 cm)
Warranty:  1 year
The Century Body Opponent Bag (B.O.B.) training dummy is a freestanding bag with human characteristics to help make your training more realistic. The shape lets you practice more specific punches and kicks that regular heavy bags don’t allow.
With an adjustable height of 60–78 in (152.4–198.1 cm) and a base that can be filled with water or sand, this bag is versatile for trainees of all sizes.
With a rating of 4.8 out of 5 stars on Amazon and almost 2,000 reviews, the Century B.O.B. has an established track record among boxers and martial artists alike.
human-like shape
adjustable height
may slide a bit on some surfaces
more expensive than other options
Price:  $$
Materials:  vinyl/plastic
Fill:  high density foam
Weight:  250 lb (113.4 kg)
Height:  47–68 in (119.4–172.7 cm)
Warranty:  1 year limited
The Century Original Wavemaster Freestanding bag has many of the benefits of a typical freestanding bag with the bonus that its height is adjustable from 47–68 in (119.4–172.7 cm).
This makes the bag quite versatile, able to accommodate people of all sizes, and suited for a variety of movements, from kicks to high punches.
The base can be filled with water or sand, but most reviewers recommend filling it with sand for better stability.
This bag is good for boxing workouts and light striking, but those looking for a bag that won’t move at all may want to opt for a hanging heavy bag.
This bag is also well reviewed. With almost 4,300 reviews on Amazon, it maintains an average rating of 4.6 stars.
adjustable height
free shipping
easy assembly
may move around with heavy strikes
Price:  $$
Materials:  vinyl
Fill:  water and air
Weight:  70–120 lb (31.8–54.4 kg)
Height:  36 in (91.4 cm)
Warranty:  2 years for inside bladder
The MaxxMMA Water/Air Heavy Bag uses a combination of water and air for striking resistance, which makes it easy to adjust the weight.
Because it’s adjustable from 70–120 lb (31.8–54.4 kg), it’s appropriate for trainees of varying experience levels.
Plus, it comes with an air pump to inflate the bag and a hose to add water.
Users mention that the MaxxMMA heavy bag provides great value and mimics the feel of a traditional heavy bag. With roughly 600 reviews, it holds a 4.4-star average rating.
budget-friendly
adjustable weight
portable
smaller than other options
may require additional chain for height adjustment
Price:  $
Materials:  genuine leather
Fill:  air
Weight:  less than 2 lb (0.5 kg)
Height:  9 in (22.9 cm)
Warranty:  30-day return or replacement
At less than 2 lb (0.5 kg), the Pro Impact Double-Ended Punching Bag is extremely lightweight.
While it doesn’t provide the resistance that heavy bags do, the wrecking-ball bag is an excellent option for speed and technique work.
It comes with the necessary bungee cords to install the bag — just fill it with air, and you’re good to go. You do need a place to attach it, as it requires floor and ceiling mounts.
This punching bag is a solid option for boxing speed work and has an Amazon rating of 4.3 out of 5 stars with roughly 450 reviews.
highly portable
good for small spaces
good value
less resistance than a heavy bag
may lose air over time
Price:  $
Materials:  vinyl with nylon straps
Fill:  synthetic fibers
Weight:  40 lb (18.1 kg)
Height:  40 in (101.6 cm)
Warranty:  30-day return
The Ringside 40-Pound Heavy Bag is a budget-friendly choice for children, teenagers, beginners who are just getting into boxing or other combat sports, and folks under 5 ft. It may be a little small (and lightweight) for some adult users.
At 40 in (101.6 cm) long, this bag is approachable in size but still substantial enough to handle hard punches from smaller users.
Reviewers report that the bag is well made and provides great value for the price. With roughly 430 reviews, it has an average 4.6-star rating.
As a bonus, it comes with hand wraps and gloves to help you get started.
Note that you’ll need additional hardware to properly hang this bag.
includes gloves and wraps
good option for beginners and youth
on the smaller side
requires additional hardware to hang
Price:  $
Materials:  synthetic leather
Fill:  air
Weight:  8.4 lb (3.8 kg) as shipped, can be filled with 15 lb of sand for stability
Height:  adjustable from 48–58 in (121.9–147.3 cm)
Warranty:  30-day return
This punching bag is similar to a double-ended punching bag, with the added benefit of being easier to move because it’s freestanding.
The height adjusts from 48 – 58 in (121.9–147.3 cm), and the bag’s smaller size and spring-back action make it useful for speed and technique work.
In addition to the punching bag, you’ll get a pair of boxing gloves and a pump to blow up the air bladder inside the bag.
With more than 4,200 ratings on Amazon, this Tech Tools Punching Bag has a 4.3-star rating and is a popular entry-level option.
includes gloves
doesn’t require hanging
good for smaller spaces
not a full-size punching bag
may not suit people who are tall

How to choose the best punching bag
With so many punching bags to choose from, deciding which one to buy can be a bit overwhelming.
Here are a few main factors to consider:
Level of experience:  More advanced trainees may require heavier bags, whereas beginners can use smaller, lighter bags.
Body weight:  A good general rule is to choose a bag that is half your body weight.
Space requirements:  Consider how much space you have for a punching bag.
Type of training:  Various combat sports require different sizes and shapes of bags.
Bag height:  Depending on your training level, you  may  need a bag of a specific height.  For beginners:  3 ft (36-in or 91.4 cm) bags For intermediate and advanced trainees:  4–5 ft (48–60 in or 121.9–152.4 cm) bags For advanced trainees or specific striking movements:  5 ft (60 in or 152 cm) or longer bags
For beginners:  3 ft (36-in or 91.4 cm) bags
For intermediate and advanced trainees:  4–5 ft (48–60 in or 121.9–152.4 cm) bags
For advanced trainees or specific striking movements:  5 ft (60 in or 152 cm) or longer bags
Finally, you may also want to consider your budget and the warranty or return policy in case the bag malfunctions or you change your mind.

How do these punching bags compare?

Frequently asked questions
This largely depends on what kind of training you will be using it for. That said, the best punching bag for all-around use is likely a hanging heavy bag, as it’s suitable for a variety of training applications, including:
boxing
kickboxing
martial arts
cardio
There are pros and cons for both punching bag options, and deciding which type of punching bag is best for you depends on your specific needs. Standing punching bags may be a good option for individuals who need to move or store their bags between uses.
Likewise, a standing bag is more suitable if your home gym setup doesn’t allow you to hang your bag (for instance, if you’re living in an apartment where you can’t mount a bag on the ceiling). Some standing punching bags are also height adjustable, which may offer more versatility during training, especially if more than one person is going to be using the bag.
On the other hand, hanging punching bags are popular because they can stand up to more advanced-level boxing without the risk of moving around or sliding on the floor. Many are also sized for punching and kicking and are long enough to be suitable for users of varying heights.
Traditionally, punching bags are hung from an anchor that is bolted to a ceiling joist or another solid piece of wood. In some cases, they can also be hung from a pullup bar or weightlifting rack.
It is very important that the punching bag be fastened to a solid piece of wood or metal to prevent it from falling and causing injury. If you’re unsure about how to hang one, consider consulting:
a local carpenter or home improvement retailer consultant
a gym owner
the company’s website for assistance
Generally speaking, the highest quality punching bags are filled with natural fabrics or fibers because these tend to hold their shape and resist settling.
Punching bags use a variety of fillings, such as:
fabric scraps
water
air
sand
synthetic fibers
Some even use a combination of a few fillings.
After all of your hard research, you may still be wondering, “Are punching bags worth it?” Depending on what kind of training you do, regularly using a punching bag can come with several potential benefits.
Boxing-style training is associated with a  number of positive outcomes , including improved heart health, lower blood pressure, better balance, increased strength, and weight loss in individuals for whom that is a goal.
In addition, regularly punching the bag can help  provide stress relief .
This is based on fighter preference. Punching without gloves does help the knuckles and the tendons around the wrist become stronger. However, you do run the risk of potential wrist or hand injury if you land a punch on a bag without a glove incorrectly.

The bottom line
With the rise in popularity of combat sports, punching bags have become a staple in home and commercial gyms alike.
Numerous types of punching bags are available in various shapes, sizes, and sport specifications.
When choosing a punching bag, consider factors like your:
body weight
level of experience
available space
type of training
Though a punching bag is a key piece of equipment for boxing or MMA training, you may also need boxing gloves and hand wraps.

References:

https://www.amazon.com/dp/B0841BYQ56?tag=healthline-subtag-20
https://www.healthline.com#overall
https://www.amazon.com/dp/B08MDX4G8W?tag=healthline-subtag-20
https://www.healthline.com#beginners
https://www.amazon.com/dp/B076X7P92X?tag=healthline-subtag-20
https://www.healthline.com#pkg-deal
https://www.amazon.com/dp/B00CRMMREQ?tag=healthline-subtag-20
https://www.healthline.com#heavy
https://www.amazon.com/dp/B006CV8NLE?tag=healthline-subtag-20
https://www.healthline.com#muay-thai
https://www.amazon.com/dp/B01MSCOQ78?tag=healthline-subtag-20
https://www.healthline.com#portable
https://www.healthline.comhttps://quietpunch.com/products/quiet-punch-smart-punching-bag?sscid=41k6_me2ia
https://www.healthline.com#small-spaces
https://www.titleboxing.com/products/title-boxing-wall-mount-menace-training-bag
https://www.healthline.com#wall-mount
https://www.healthline.comhttp://amazon.com/dp/B00329TVEM/ref=as_li_ss_tl?tag=healthline-subtag-20
https://www.healthline.com#lifelike
https://www.amazon.com/dp/B00022KJ16?tag=healthline-subtag-20
https://www.healthline.com#adjustable
https://www.amazon.com/dp/B08N3J3DVG?tag=healthline-subtag-20
https://www.healthline.com#water-air
https://www.amazon.com/dp/B00YAZ9K20?tag=healthline-subtag-20
https://www.healthline.com#ball
https://www.amazon.com/dp/B01C64C9HO?tag=healthline-subtag-20
https://www.healthline.com#petite
https://www.amazon.com/dp/B07JJP4XTL?tag=healthline-subtag-20
https://www.healthline.com#under-100
https://www.healthline.com/about/vet-brands-and-products
https://www.healthline.comhttps://quietpunch.com/products/quiet-punch-smart-punching-bag?variant=40426863263909
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/10749357.2020.1783918
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fpsyg.2021.643069/full
