Title: The 8 Best Food Scales for Every Purpose

Many seasoned chefs and amateur gourmet cooks will agree that a reliable food scale is essential if you want to achieve consistent results in your culinary pursuits. And while you may not necessarily  need  a food scale to pull off basic family dinners or pie-baking marathons, it can be an incredibly handy tool to keep things efficient, easy, and stress-free in the kitchen.
In addition, nutritionists often recommend digital food scales for those who are  tracking macros .
If you’ve ever shopped for a kitchen scale, however, you know that the sheer number of options can feel overwhelming. This is where Healthline can help! We did the research, consulted our in-house nutritionists, and selected these as the 8 best food scales for every purpose.

A quick look at the best food scales
Best overall food scale:   Escali Primo Digital Scale
Best runner-up food scale:   Nicewell Digital Kitchen Scale
Best high capacity digital food scale:   Etekcity Luminary Waterproof Kitchen Scale
Best mechanical food scale:   Taylor Precision
Best food scale for nutrition tracking:   Etekcity Smart Nutrition Scale
Best-looking food scale:   Zwilling Enfinigy Digital Food Scale
Best affordable food scale:   Amazon Basics Digital Kitchen Scale
Best rechargeable food scale:   KOIOS USB Rechargeable
$  = under $15
$$  = $15–$30
$$$  = over $30

Healthline’s picks of the best food scales
inches = in.
centimeters = cm
pounds = lbs.
kilograms kg
ounces = oz.
fluid ounces = fl. oz.
milliliters = mL
Price:  $$
Dimensions:  8.5 × 6 × 1.5 in. (21.6 × 15.2 × 3.8 cm)
Available capacity:  11 lbs. (5 kg)
Display units:  oz., lbs.:oz., g
Reviewers praise the Escali Primo for its simplicity, ease of use, and large LED screen.
The scale is compact enough for easy storage, yet the capacity is surprisingly large for its size. However, some reviewers dislike the small surface area for weighing.
It’s also easy to clean, and the buttons and screen are sealed to prevent any potential damage from spills or other food messes.
The device is battery-operated (it requires 2 AA batteries) and includes a shutoff feature that’s activated after 4 minutes of nonuse, which is handy for preserving battery life.
compact
easy to clean
features a large screen
maximum weight is 11 lbs. (5 kg)
small surface area
Price:  $$
Dimensions:  9 × 6.2 × 0.8 in. (22.9 × 15.7 × 2 cm)
Available capacity:  22 lbs. (10 kg)
Display units:  g, kg, lbs., oz., fl. oz., mL
Nicewell’s digital food scale features a sleek yet practical design that may help meet all of your cooking and baking needs.
This scale has a 22-lb. (10-kg) weight limit, which is significantly higher than those of many similar models. It also features a large weight platform for added convenience.
Despite its larger surface area and high weight capacity, it’s remarkably thin and easy to store and transport. The weight platform is made from tempered glass for easy cleaning, and the scale includes five unit options for measuring a variety of foods.
The scale is also waterproof, but some users report it malfunctions after being exposed to water.
The Nicewell digital scale is battery-powered and automatically turns off after 2 minutes to help maximize battery life.
An alert for when your battery is running low or you’ve exceeded the weight capacity rounds out its list of features.
equipped with backlit LCD screen
high weight capacity
compact design
waterproof, but some users report malfunctions after water exposure
Price:  $$
Dimensions:  9 × 7 × 1 in. (22.9 × 17.8 × 2.5 cm)
Available capacity:  22 lbs. (10 kg)
Display units:  g, oz., lbs.:oz., mL, fl. oz.
If your kitchen tasks include weighing large and bulky items, then you may want to consider a scale with a greater surface area that can handle more weight.
This Etekcity model can hold up to 22 lbs. (10 kg) and has a rather large platform for weighing. Plus, the slightly slanted LED screen makes it easy to read, even when weighing larger, bulkier items.
The food-grade stainless steel top is waterproof (but not submergible) and easy to wipe clean. It also runs on a battery that can be recharged with an included USB-C charger.
Keep in mind that because it has a 0.07-oz. (2-g) minimum weight requirement, this scale isn’t suitable for lighter items or smaller quantities.
easy to read
high weight capacity
rechargeable
doesn’t weigh very light quantities
larger, less compact design
Price:  $$
Dimensions:  10.25 × 7.38 × 4.13 in. (26 × 18.7 × 10.5 cm)
Available capacity:  22 lbs. (10 kg)
Display units:  lbs., kg
Mechanical scales tend to be slightly less precise than digital ones, but they’re considerably more durable and don’t require batteries or power cords.
When it comes to mechanical food scales, the Taylor Precision is one of the best.
The scale features a simple, low profile design that’s suitable for large and small spaces alike. It has a 22-lbs. (10-kg) weight capacity, and the oversized weighing tray is made from durable, dishwasher-safe stainless steel.
Like other mechanical scales, the Taylor Precision is better at handling larger-weight kitchen tasks than more precise jobs, as it measures only in lbs. and kg.
Also keep in mind that it doesn’t have a tare button, so you’ll need to break out the calculator if you use a vessel other than the included weighing tray. Additionally, manual scales will require calibration over time to ensure accuracy.
Other notable features include a large, scratch-resistant screen with easy-to-read graphics, imperial and metric unit options, and an affordable price point.
Plus, since there are no batteries or cords, it’s a good choice for anyone intimidated by electronic or smart kitchen tools.
no batteries required
easy to use
high weight capacity
requires manual calibration
measures in 2-oz. (50-g) increments
bulky design
Price:  $$
Dimensions:  8.1 × 6.5 × 1.3 in. (21.6 × 16.5 × 3.3 cm)
Available capacity:  11 lbs. (5 kg)
Display units:  g, oz., lbs., mL
The Etekcity Smart Nutrition Scale is a helpful tool if you’re looking to monitor or track your food intake.
In addition to weighing out  portions , it features Bluetooth connectivity that allows you to pair the scale with your smartphone or tablet.
Purchase of the scale includes free access to the VeSync app, which offers a large food database for easy food tracking. The scale is also compatible with many other  nutrition apps , making it easy to sync your data.
One drawback of this scale is that it doesn’t accurately weigh less than 1 g. Additionally, many users report a lag when pressing buttons to tare the scale or change the units.
The Etekcity Smart Nutrition scale runs on three AAA batteries, has a large LCD screen, and is made from stainless steel for easy cleaning. The device is also compact and weighs less than 1 lb. (0.45 kg).
compatible with nutrition apps for food tracking
features Bluetooth connectivity
compact design
lags when changing units and taring
unable to weigh less than 1 g
maximum weight is 11 lbs. (5 kg)
Price:  $$$
Dimensions:  9.6 × 7.4 × 0.8 in. (24.4 × 18.8 × 2 cm)
Available capacity:  22 lbs. (10 kg)
Display units:  g, oz.
This sleek, stylish scale from Zwilling features a glass top for a streamlined appearance.
It’s also capable of handling up to 22 lbs. (10 kg) and has a large LCD screen that reviewers say is easy to read.
The scale is also accurate starting at weights of just 0.1 oz. (2.83 g).
The unit is rechargeable with a USB cable, which is included.
Just keep in mind that while the glass top is stunning, reviewers note that it scratches easily. Some also complain that the touch controls can be temperamental at times.
features sleek design
easy to read
rechargeable
accurate starting at weights of just 0.1 oz. (2.83 g)
glass top scratches easily
expensive
Price:  $
Dimensions:  8.7 × 7 × 1.2 in. (22 × 17.8 × 3 cm)
Available capacity:  11 lbs. (5 kg)
Display units:  g, oz., lbs.
The Amazon Basics Digital Kitchen Scale is a good option if you’re looking for a no-frills food scale at an affordable price.
While it’s simple in design, most reviewers agree that the scale is reliable, durable, and easy to use.
It also has a large LCD screen for viewing weights, and the “tare” and “units” buttons are conveniently placed next to the screen.
This scale doesn’t measure food below 0.07 oz. (2 g). So if you’re regularly weighing food in small quantities, it’s not the best choice.
Like others on this list, the scale is battery-powered and features a stainless steel top for easy cleaning.
easy to clean
easy to read
inexpensive
doesn’t weigh below 0.07 oz. (2 g)
maximum weight is 11 lbs. (5 kg)
Price:  $$
Dimensions:  8.3 × 6.3 × 0.81 in. (21 × 16 × 7.6 cm)
Available capacity:  11 lbs. (5 kg)
Display units:  g, kg, lbs.:oz., fl. oz., mL
The KOIOS rechargeable food scale is a lightweight digital scale that can help you accurately weigh a variety of foods.
It includes six measuring unit options, which you can switch between with the touch of a button.
It’s also equipped with a backlit LCD screen, though some users report difficulty reading it when a large bowl or plate is on the scale.
The waterproof tempered glass weighing platform holds up to 11 lbs. (5 kg). However, the minimum weight for this scale is provided in a range of 0.1–0.2 oz. (3–5 g), making it best for weighing larger quantities of food.
However, the feature that really sets the KOIOS scale apart is its rechargeable battery, which offers up to 3 months of battery life per charge.
Easily recharged using a USB cable, the KOIOS USB Rechargeable scale is a good option if you don’t want to constantly keep disposable batteries on hand.
waterproof
rechargeable
easy to clean
minimum weight is 0.1–0.2 oz. (3–5 g)
may be difficult to read when weighing large items
maximum weight is 11 lbs. (5 kg)

Product comparison
Here’s a quick look at how our top picks compare:

How we chose
The products on this list were selected using the following criteria:
Use:  We prioritized scales that are easy and intuitive to use.
Features:  We included scales offering a wide range of functions and capabilities.
Weight capacity:  We chose scales that are suitable for a variety of sizes and capacities.
Price:  We included scales at a variety of price points.
Vetting:  The scales on our list have been vetted to ensure that they align with Healthline’s brand integrity standards and approach to well-being. You can read more about  our vetting process .

How to choose the best food scale
While it might seem like a straightforward purchase, there are several factors to keep in mind when shopping for a food scale.
If you’re using it for simple home cooking and baking projects, any of the compact digital options would be a good fit.
However, if you plan on weighing larger quantities of food or other items, such as whole produce or meat, a sturdy mechanical scale might be more suitable.
Some scales offer Bluetooth connectivity and nutrition-tracking features, which may be appealing if you’re interested in  keeping tabs on your macros  or calories.
If you don’t want to spend a lot, compact digital scales tend to be more budget-friendly but still offer all the essential weighing features. Remember, a higher price tag isn’t necessarily indicative of higher quality.
If you need a scale with a high weight capacity but don’t want to deal with batteries or power cords, a high capacity mechanical scale might be the best choice.
Conversely, if you prefer the ease and precision of a digital scale, a high capacity digital scale might be more appropriate.

Frequently asked questions
There are multiple brands of food scales that are accurate for weighing food for baking, cooking, or nutrient tracking.
Digital food scales are often more accurate than mechanical scales because they can measure in smaller increments and don’t require frequent calibration.
Choose a food scale that has a tare feature and allows for small increments of measure for the most precision when weighing.
Buying a food scale may be worth it if you need to measure ingredients precisely for baking or other recipes. Additionally, a food scale may be beneficial for anyone looking to closely track nutrient intake and portion sizes.
However, food scales aren’t always needed for recipes and standard measurement tools like spoons and cups can also provide accurate measurements for most recipes.
Nutrition scales are like other digital food scales. However, most nutrition scales come with an accompanying app or other tracking feature, which helps convert measured food quantities into calories, macronutrients, and micronutrients.
The benefit of a nutrition scale is that it makes it easy to quantify the nutritional value for a specific weight of a food instead of having to reference a separate database.
You can accomplish the same goal by using a standard digital scale along with a food tracking app if a nutrition scale is not of interest or in your budget.
Chefs often use mechanical scales with a high weight capacity to measure large quantities of food for recipes.
Additionally, digital scales are used when measuring ingredients in small quantities.
You will also find specialty scales for various types of baking and cooking, such as pizza scales, which have a large surface area to hold a full-sized pizza.

The bottom line
Food scales help make tasks like cooking, baking, portioning, and nutrition tracking more simple and accurate.
Before selecting a scale, consider how you plan to use it, your budget, and which features are most appealing to you.
Whether you prefer digital or analog, low or high capacity, or compact or heavy duty, there’s a suitable option for everyone.

References:

https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/how-to-count-macros
https://www.healthline.com#overall
https://www.healthline.com#runner-up
https://www.healthline.com#high-capacity-digital
https://www.healthline.com#mechanical
https://www.healthline.com#nutrition-tracking
https://www.healthline.com#looking
https://www.healthline.com#affordable
https://www.healthline.com#rechargeable
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/portion-control
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/top-iphone-android-apps
https://www.healthline.com/about/vet-brands-and-products
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/how-to-count-macros
