Title: 8 of the Best Brooks Running Shoes


A quick look at the best Brooks running shoes
Best overall:   Brooks Launch 9
Best high end:   Brooks Hyperion Elite 3
Best affordable:   Brooks Revel 5
Best cushioning and support:   Brooks Glycerin GTS 20
Best for road running:   Brooks Adrenaline GTS 22
Best for everyday training:   Brooks Ghost 14
Best for trail running:   Brooks Cascadia 16
Best for speed:   Brooks Levitate Stealthfit 5
Brooks is a Seattle-based fitness apparel company best known for producing high quality, reliable running shoes.
The 108-year-old brand continues to be a favorite among casual and distance runners alike, as it offers shoes that are durable and comfortable.
What’s more, Brooks is committed to sustainability and makes many shoes from recyclable materials.
Given that the company offers numerous shoe options for road, trail, and distance running, it may seem overwhelming to figure out which pair is best for you.

How we chose these Brooks running shoes
When evaluating the best Brooks running shoes, we considered the following factors:
Materials:  We searched for high quality, durable materials that are best suited for a specific style of running.
Special features:  We considered how each shoe was constructed for its intended use. While some shoes feature extra stability and support, others are lighter and more breathable.
Price:  We included shoes at a range of price points.
Customer reviews:  The shoes on this list have mostly positive customer reviews.
Vetting:  The shoes on our list have been vetted to ensure that they align with Healthline’s brand integrity standards and approach to well-being. You can read more about  our vetting process .
Here are the 8 best Brooks running shoes of 2022.
General price ranges with dollar signs ($–$$$) are indicated below. One dollar sign means the product is rather affordable, whereas three dollar signs indicate a higher cost.
Generally, prices range from $100 to $249.95, though this may vary depending on where you shop.
Pricing guide
$  = under $125
$$  = $125–$175
$$$  = over $175
We use “men’s” and “women’s” in this article to align with how products are sold on retail sites, but that does not mean you need to stick to one or the other. Choose the product with the fit, style, and features that work best for you.

Healthline’s picks of the best Brooks running shoes
Price:  $
Weight:  7.1 ounces (oz), or 201.3 grams (g), women’s; 8.2 oz (232.5 g) men’s
Drop:  10 millimeters (mm)
A favorite among racers and casual runners alike, the Brooks Launch 9 is our pick for the best overall Brooks  running shoe , as it’s designed to be lightweight while still providing plenty of cushion and neutral support.
The Launch 9 features an updated mesh upper that’s lighter and more breathable than previous versions. Plus, it has an extra layer of Brooks’ signature BioMoGo DNA cushioning, which adds padding without weighing down the shoe. The outsole is made of silica, a sustainable material.
The Launch 9 is also one of the more affordable Brooks running shoes.
However, some customers find this shoe a bit too narrow.
ultra-comfortable
lightweight and breathable
supportive cushioning
narrow design
stiff tongue
not the most durable upper mesh
Price:  $$$
Weight:  8.1 oz (229.6 g)
Drop:  8 mm
If you’re looking for a reliable pair of high end kicks, look no further than the Hyperion Elite 3, which features an extra-cushioned insole and a supportive heel.
Built for racing, this breathable shoe has an ultra-lightweight midsole. Plus, it features a carbon plate and Rapid Roll technology (a curved heel and toe) to help propel you forward.
The Hyperion Elite 3 features several updates to the previous version, including additional cushioning at the heel and a longer pull tab. Plus, one side of the tongue is attached to the inside of the shoe to keep the tongue from sliding around.
The Hyperion Elite 3 was designed to withstand training for and running a  marathon .
carbon plate to help propel you forward
curved heel and toe designed to help with speed
lightweight and comfortable
limited color options
may wear out quickly
Price:  $
Weight:  8 oz (226.8 g) women’s; 8.8 oz (249.5 g) men’s
Drop:  8 mm
The Brooks Revel 5 is a budget-friendly option that still offers plenty of value. The shoe features a knitted upper, neutral support, and sustainable silica soles.
It also has lightweight cushioning that’s designed to be responsive and allow for faster transitions while you run.
The Revel 5 is made to handle runs, indoor workouts, and more. While reviewers agree that this shoe provides great value for the price, some mention that it is not as durable as other Brooks models.
comfortable and versatile
lightweight, breathable design
may wear out quickly
lack of durability
laces may untie easily
Price:  $$
Weight:  9.4 oz (266.5 g) women’s; 10.5 oz (297.7 g) men’s
Drop:  10 mm
The Brooks Glycerin GTS 20 is a good option for runners looking for extra stability and support.
This shoe features Brooks’ patented GuideRails technology, which is designed to keep your foot, ankle, and knee stable while still allowing for the natural motion of your foot.
It also has a thick, cushioned heel for added comfort when running on treadmills or hard surfaces like pavement and concrete.
Compared to the Glycerin GTS 19, the Glycerin GTS 20 has been updated with more cushioning, a lightweight mesh upper, and a wider outsole.
Reviewers frequently mention that this shoe is incredibly comfortable and that the cushioning is soft enough for all-day wear.
extra cushioning for added comfort
offers more support and stability than other models
breathable design
slippery soles
some reports of sizing issues
Price:  $$
Weight:  9 oz (255.1 g) women’s; 10.2 oz (289.2 g) men’s
Drop:  12 mm
The Brooks Adrenaline GTS 22 is a good option for road running thanks to its medium cushioning and support.
Featuring medium-high arches, stable yet flexible construction, and Brooks’ DNA LOFT cushioning, which provides a smoother stride, the shoe is designed to keep you comfortable on long runs.
Like the Glycerin GTS 20, the Adrenaline GTS 22 is built with Brooks’ GuideRails support system to prevent excessive ankle movement.
With more than 5,000 reviews on Amazon, this shoe is one of Brooks’ most popular models.
supportive and stable
breathable upper
comfortable for flat feet
short laces that may untie easily
some reports that the sole peels off
Price:  $$
Weight:  9 oz (255.1 g) women’s; 9.9 oz (280 g) men’s
Drop:  12 mm
Available in a variety of colors and styles, the Brooks Ghost 14 is a good option if you’re looking for a reliable  everyday running  shoe.
With soft cushioning, neutral support, and a plush fit, the Ghost 14 provides enough comfort and support for both road running and cross-training.
The shoe also incorporates sustainable materials and is Brooks’ first carbon-neutral shoe.
versatile
lightweight
good arch support
tight, narrow fit
less cushioning than the previous model
may lack durability
Price:  $$
Weight:  9.5 oz (269.3 g) women’s; 10.5 oz (297.7 g) men’s
Drop:  8 mm
The Brooks Cascadia 16 is a solid, sturdy shoe that’s great if you plan on running up steep hills and down slick mountainsides. There’s a rock plate in the sole to protect your feet from uneven, rocky terrain.
The shoe features a thick rubber sole and a protective exterior for added durability, as well as a cushioned and supportive interior to keep your foot comfortable and secure. According to Brooks, the Cascadia 16’s updated cushioning makes it softer and 20% lighter than the previous model.
Plus, the Cascadia’s newly engineered monoloop mesh and 3D fit print upper provide the breathability to keep your feet cool while you sweat.
excellent traction
stable and supportive
performs well on uneven terrain
too stiff for some
some reports of a sloppy fit
may rub or cause blisters
Price:  $–$$
Weight:  8.6 oz (243.8 g) women’s; 9.8 oz (277.8 g) men’s
Drop:  8 mm
The Levitate Stealthfit 5 features a streamlined design with an integrated tongue and a sock-like knit upper that offers both structure and breathability.
Built for speed, the shoe features Brooks’ trademarked DNA AMP foam midsole, which is designed to absorb shock and be extra springy. It’s also constructed with an arrow-point outsole to allow for quicker heel-to-toe transitions.
While this shoe gets positive reviews, a few customers mention that it runs small, so you may want to size up.
comfortable, bouncy feel
sleek, lightweight design
supportive
may run small
thin soles
may cause arch discomfort

Shoe comparison

How to choose the best running shoes
Finding the right pair of running shoes is essential for staying safe and comfortable while you run. Here are some factors to consider when shopping for your next pair:
Function:  Are you a trail runner, or do you plan on logging miles on the road? Look for running shoes that are specifically designed for your intended use.
Fit:  Do you have a narrow foot or need a wider toe box? To avoid blisters and hot spots, make sure to choose a shoe that’s designed to  fit your foot shape .
Cushioning:  While some runners prefer a more minimalist style shoe, others like plenty of cushioning. Consider how much padding you want in a running shoe.
Stability:  If you overpronate or are worried about rolling your ankle, consider choosing a shoe that’s designed to provide extra support and stability.
Customer reviews:  Customer reviews provide valuable insight into the durability, comfort, and fit of a shoe.
Dr. Adam Hotchkiss , a podiatrist and foot and ankle surgeon, adds that it’s best to try shoes on at the end of the day “because this is when your foot has the most swelling” due to moving around all day.

Frequently asked questions about Brooks running shoes
“This will depend on how much running you do in your shoes,” Hotchkiss says. “On average, running shoes will last 300–500 miles. If you are an avid runner and running 20 miles a week, that equates to 4–6 months of use. If you run less, your shoes will last longer.”
Yes, you can wear running shoes for walking.
Hotchkiss says, “Running shoes usually provide support, stability, cushion, and comfort that make them great for walking or just casual day-to-day use.” However, it’s important to find the level of stability and support that feels most comfortable to you.
“The Ghost is considered a neutral shoe, while the Adrenaline is a stability shoe,” explains Hotchkiss. The Adrenaline GTS 22 features Brooks’ GuideRails technology for added stability, and it’s a little heavier.
“The Ghost is likely better for day-to-day activity and casual training, while the Adrenaline is more geared toward the avid runner/athlete,” says Hotchkiss.

The bottom line
Brooks has been producing high quality running shoes for more than 100 years.
From rugged trail runners to plush and supportive cross-trainers, Brooks has an option for every type of runner.
We’re confident that by considering your running style and using the list above, you’ll find a pair that works for you.

References:

https://www.healthline.com#overall
https://www.healthline.com#high-end
https://www.healthline.com#affordable
https://www.healthline.com#cushioning-and-support
https://www.healthline.com#road-running
https://www.healthline.com#everyday-training
https://www.healthline.com#trail-running
https://www.healthline.com#speed
https://www.healthline.com/about/vet-brands-and-products
https://www.healthline.com/health/10-best-running-shoes-in-mens-sizes
https://www.healthline.com/health/exercise-fitness/average-marathon-time
https://www.healthline.com/health/fitness-exercise/running-everyday
https://www.healthline.com/health/how-a-running-shoe-should-fit
https://www.healthline.com/reviewers/adam-hotchkiss-dpm
