Title: Peloton Treadmill Review: Is It Worth the Price?

As of May 2021, Peloton announced a  voluntary recall  of the Peloton Tread and Tread+ treadmills due to safety concerns. While the company has since released an updated version of the Tread, Peloton recommends customers who already own a recalled model stop using it and contact Peloton for a full refund.
Whether you’re interested in the convenience, ability to work out in your home, or saving money on gym membership fees, treadmills are a popular choice for staying fit and healthy at home.
One popular option is the Peloton treadmill, which claims to offer a workout experience that keeps you returning for more with its extensive library of workout classes and high-definition (HD) touch-screen display.
The Peloton treadmill line includes the Tread and Tread+.
While both treadmills were recalled in 2021 due to safety concerns, the company has since rereleased the Tread with updated safety features. However, the Tread+ is still unavailable.
This article provides a detailed review of the updated Peloton Tread, including hands-on feedback from Peloton owners to help you decide whether a Peloton treadmill is right for you.

Peloton treadmill basics
Known for its flagship  stationary smart bikes , Peloton has expanded its offerings to include the Tread and Tread+ treadmills.
Like the stationary bikes, they’re equipped with HD touch screens for streaming thousands of workout classes.
Led by certified instructors, these classes vary in length and difficulty. Classes also go beyond traditional treadmill workouts to include strength training,  yoga , stretching, and more.
For the treadmill-based classes, you can follow along using the touch screen or cast the workouts to a nearby smart TV for viewing.
If you prefer to work out on your own, you can choose from several scenic walks, runs, or hikes to complete at your own pace.
“It’s one of the few treadmills I can run on for extensive periods of time and not get pain like shin splints,” says one Healthline reviewer. “I’m a former collegiate athlete, and after two knee surgeries, it is definitely my preferred treadmill.”
Through its All-Access membership, the Peloton app allows members to view and track workout metrics like speed, mileage, and heart rate.
Because they are quite large, Peloton treadmills include expert assembly, so you don’t have to worry about setting up the machine yourself.
After the treadmill is assembled, the installer will walk you through all of its features.
While the Tread is available, Peloton is currently making safety updates to the design of its original treadmill, so you have to wait to purchase the Tread+. There is no estimated time of arrival as of March 2023, but you can  sign up for updates  on their website.

Peloton treadmill pros and cons at a glance
large built-in touch screen and Bluetooth capable
vast library of on-demand and live classes with upbeat instructors
access to scenic and gamified runs
tracks performance stats and has live leaderboards
works with most heart rate monitors
only one model available; Tread+ has not yet been relaunched with new safety features
does not support third-party streaming subscriptions like Netflix or Hulu
requires manual adjustment of incline and speed (unlike some other treadmills that auto-adjust with the class)

Peloton treadmill specs
There are many factors, including some that may not be so obvious, to consider when deciding which treadmill is the best fit for you and your space.
Below is a side-by-side comparison of the specs for the Peloton Tread and Tread+.
The Tread is currently the only Peloton treadmill available for purchase. Additionally, as the Tread+ is undergoing safety updates, there’s a possibility that the specifications listed above may change once the updated version is released.
That said, both models currently offer speeds of up to 12.5 miles per hour (20 kph), built-in speakers, Bluetooth connectivity, and HD touch-screen displays.
They’re also similar in size, though the Tread+ provides a larger running deck and requires additional head clearance.
While it lacks some of the bells and whistles found in the Tread+, the Peloton Tread is a solidly built treadmill that’s designed to provide a high-tech running experience.

Safety updates
Given the May 2021 recall, it’s understandable if you’re concerned about the safety of the Peloton treadmills.
The initial safety concern with the Tread (as opposed to the Tread+) was that, in rare instances, the touch screen would loosen, and in some cases, fall off the machine, potentially causing injury.
However, after being pulled from the market, the Peloton Tread was rereleased and now features a more secure screen plus two additional safety features:
Tread lock:  a four-digit digital passcode that users must enter before the belt will unlock
Safety key:  allows the belt to come to a halt quickly and safely in case of an emergency
If you have an older Tread model, there’s also an option to get the touch screen tightened and fixed through Peloton.
The updated Tread+ is not available yet, as the safety features are still being worked on.
Keep in mind that even with the new safety features, it’s still best to keep kids, pets, and small items like exercise balls or weights away from treadmills.

Peloton treadmill cost
The Peloton Tread costs $3,495 plus tax. Delivery and setup are included.
For qualified customers, Peloton offers special financing that allows you to pay $82 per month for 43 months at a 0% annual percentage rate.
If you’re interested in purchasing additional home gym accessories, Peloton also offers three package deals:
Tread Select ($3,340):  includes Peloton Camelbak water bottle, reversible workout mat, two sets of dumbbells, and a heart rate monitor.
Tread Ultimate ($3,420):  includes everything in the Select package plus yoga blocks and a yoga strap
In addition to purchasing the treadmill itself, Peloton requires you to sign up for a 1-year All-Access membership to the company’s app.
An All-Access membership costs $44 per month and allows you to stream thousands of on-demand classes and daily live Tread classes. It also allows each person in your household to create a separate profile.
You’ll also be able to access thousands of non-treadmill workouts, participate in live leaderboards, view your performance stats, and connect with other Peloton app users.
You can choose to cancel your subscription at any time. However, keep in mind that because the device prohibits users from downloading other apps, such as YouTube and Netflix, the HD screen is essentially useless without a Peloton app membership.
If you’re not satisfied with the Peloton Tread, you can contact the company and schedule a free pickup for a full refund within 30 days of delivery.
To protect your purchase, the Tread is covered by a 5-year warranty on the frame, 3-year warranty on the motor and belt, and a 12-month limited warranty on parts and labor.
Keep in mind warranty coverage is nontransferable and doesn’t cover cosmetic damage.

Our experience
Reviews for the rereleased Peloton Tread are positive overall, with many customers noting how quiet and stable the machine is.
Reviewers also rave about the experience of using the Peloton app. In particular, users appreciate the variety of classes to choose from and the upbeat energy of the instructors. “The hardware is solid, and the instruction is what sets it apart,” says one Healthline reviewer.
“The classes are everything they are cracked up to be,” says another. “They keep it fun, provide a ton of variety, and the instructors will push you harder than you thought you could go. Whether it is running, walking, hiking, or boot camps, there is always a class to match your mood.”
However, not all reviews are positive. Several customers complain that, unlike several of  NordicTrack’s treadmills  that offer Automatic Trainer Control during classes, the Tread requires you to manually adjust your speed. However, the Peloton does offer auto incline.
One Healthline reviewer notes that the adjustment knobs are still a huge improvement: “So much more convenient than trying to mash buttons on a screen.”
Other users note that in some cases, the ceiling height — which needs to be 20 inches (51 cm) above your head when using the treadmill — is an issue, especially if you plan to use the Tread on its full incline.
Finally, some mention that the belt doesn’t feel as cushioned as those of competitor models.

Peloton treadmill vs. competitors
The Peloton Tread is far from the only high-tech  treadmill  on the market. Here’s a look at how the Peloton treadmill stacks up to its competitors.
It’s hard to go wrong with any of the treadmills listed above. After all, they each include an HD touch screen and app integration for streaming live and on-demand classes.
Furthermore, they support users up to 300 pounds (136 kg) and have roughly the same max speed of 12 mph (19 kph), though the Peloton Tread just slightly pulls ahead with a 12.5 mph (20 kph) top speed.
Deciding which treadmill to choose comes down to whether class offerings, training options, or price is your top priority.
While  iFit  offers a wide variety of classes, Peloton tends to be more popular thanks to its music selection, fun workouts, and upbeat instructors. “I used to have iFit, and while they have more scenic runs, Peloton has more studio content and a variety of workout types,” says one reviewer.
Therefore, if you rely on classes to keep you motivated, the Tread is likely your best bet.
However, if you want a treadmill that’s packed with training features, it’s hard to compete with the NordicTrack x22i’s -6% decline to 40% incline settings. Plus, thanks to iFit integration, you can take advantage of the Automatic Trainer Control during classes.
Finally, if you’re looking to spend less than $2,000, you’ll want to choose between the NordicTrack Commercial 1750 and the ProForm 9000, both of which offer nearly identical special features and training options.
The biggest difference is size, with the ProForm being the most  compact option .
If the Tread isn’t the right fit, be sure to check out these comprehensive treadmill reviews:
NordicTrack x22i
NordicTrack Commercial 1750
ProForm Treadmills

Should you buy the Peloton Tread?
The main consideration when deciding whether to buy the Tread comes down to whether you feel that the high-tech features are worth the price.
After all, as the Tread starts at $3,495, it’s not a small investment.
However, if you regularly attend studio fitness classes, which can cost up to $30–$50 per class, the Tread may still be a good alternative to save money in the long run.
Additionally, if you like classes but struggle with  motivation  getting there or don’t have regular child care or time away from work, having a Peloton at home makes it a bit easier to fit in a workout.
Alternatively, if you prefer to work out independently and don’t enjoy or want to rely on instructor-led fitness classes for motivation, your money may be better spent on a  less expensive treadmill .
Still, for the number of training options and special features that it includes, the Tread provides excellent value for the cost.
Finally, keep in mind that while it’s unclear when the Tread+ will be rereleased, it may be worth the wait if you’re interested in a larger screen, longer deck, and cushioned running surface.

Frequently asked questions
No. The Peloton Tread requires a monthly membership to access live and on-demand classes. If you’re not interested in streaming live or on-demand studio classes, you may prefer  another treadmill  that doesn’t have a subscription fee.
Peloton does not currently offer removal services.
Yes. Peloton offers a variety of classes for the Tread that range from casual walks to high intensity runs. Instructors suggest an output range but often encourage runners to adjust as needed for how they’re feeling.
Peloton team members will finish assembling the Tread when delivering it.
They’ll assemble the various parts — the deck, feet, handles, and screen — and connect it to power wherever you’ve decided you want the treadmill to be. They will also walk you through how to use it. The whole process takes an hour or less.
No. The Peloton treadmill does not support third-party streaming subscriptions.

The bottom line
In addition to updated safety components, the Peloton Tread is packed with high-tech features and training options to keep you motivated and challenged.
While it’s relatively expensive, it may be worth the price if you value being able to stream thousands of live and on-demand classes from your living room.
Keep in mind that only the Tread has been rereleased. Peloton has yet to announce when the Tread+ is slated to return. In the meantime, fans of the Tread+ can sign up for product notifications on the company’s website.

References:
https://www.onepeloton.com/press/articles/tread-and-tread-recall
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/peloton-vs-echelon
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/13-benefits-of-yoga
https://www.onepeloton.com/tread-plus/sign-up
https://www.healthline.com/health/fitness/nordictrack-treadmill
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/best-treadmill-brands
https://www.healthline.com/health/fitness/ifit
https://www.healthline.com/health/fitness/best-compact-treadmills
https://www.healthline.com/health/fitness/nordictrack-x22i
https://www.healthline.com/health/fitness/nordictrack-commercial-1750
https://www.healthline.com/health/fitness/proform-treadmill-review
https://www.healthline.com/health/exercise-fitness/how-to-motivate-yourself-to-workout
https://www.healthline.com/health/fitness/best-treadmill-under-1000
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/best-treadmill-brands
