Title: How to Overcome Food Addiction

Overcoming a food addiction can be difficult. But identifying trigger foods and seeking help from a psychiatrist or psychologist may help you on your health journey.
The effects of certain foods on the brain make it hard for some people to avoid them.
Food addiction operates similarly to other addictions. People may find it difficult to manage their cravings for certain foods — no matter how hard they try.
Despite not wanting to, they may repeatedly find themselves eating large amounts of food — knowing that doing so may cause harm.
This article examines food addiction and provides tips to overcome it.

What is food addiction?
Food addiction  is an addiction to highly processed foods, sometimes referred to as “junk food,” and is comparable to drug addiction.
It’s a relatively new and controversial term, and  high quality statistics  on its prevalence are lacking.
Food addiction is similar to several other disorders, including  binge eating disorder , bulimia, compulsive overeating, and other feeding and eating disorders.
If you think you may have a food addiction, it’s better to get a professional opinion than try to make decisions strictly on your own. Make an appointment with a healthcare professional or nutritional professional for advice, support, or treatment.

Effects on the brain
Food addiction involves the same areas of the brain as drug addiction. The same neurotransmitters are involved, and many symptoms are identical.
Ultra-processed foods may have a powerful effect on the reward centers of the brain. These effects are caused by brain neurotransmitters like dopamine.
The foods with the most significant effect may include highly processed foods like candy,  sugary soda , and high fat  fried foods .
Researchers believe that food addiction  isn’t caused  by a lack of willpower but by a dopamine signal that affects the biochemistry of the brain.

Common symptoms of food addiction
There isn’t a blood test to diagnose food addiction. As with other addictions, healthcare professionals base it on behavioral symptoms.
Here are some  common symptoms :
frequent cravings for certain foods despite feeling full and having just finished a nutritious meal
starting to eat a craved food and often eating much more than intended
eating a craved food and sometimes eating to the point of feeling excessively stuffed
often feeling guilty after eating particular foods — yet eating them again soon after
making excuses about why responding to a food craving is a good idea
repeatedly — but unsuccessfully — trying to quit eating certain foods or setting rules for when eating them is allowed, such as at cheat meals or on certain days
often hiding the consumption of unhealthy foods from others
feeling unable to control the consumption of unhealthy foods — despite knowing that they cause physical harm or  weight gain

It’s a serious problem
Though the term addiction is often thrown around lightly, having a true addiction is a serious condition that typically requires treatment to overcome.
The symptoms and thought processes associated with food addiction are similar to those of substance use disorder. It’s just a different substance, and the social consequences may be less severe.
Food addiction can cause physical harm and  lead to chronic health conditions  like obesity and type 2 diabetes.
In addition, it may negatively impact a person’s self-esteem and self-image, making them unhappy with their body.
As with other addictions, food addiction may take an emotional toll and increase a person’s risk of premature death.

First steps in overcoming food addiction
Overcoming a food addiction can be challenging. However, some people find it helpful to write a list of pros and cons to understand how this process may affect them.
Pros:  These may include losing weight (if that is your goal), living longer, having more energy, and feeling better every day.
Cons:  These may include being unable to eat ice cream with family, no cookies during the holiday season, and having to explain food choices.
Write everything down, no matter how peculiar or vain it may seem. Then, compare the two lists and consider if it’s worth it.
If the answer is a resounding “yes,” be assured that it’s the right decision.
A few things can help prepare for giving up processed foods and make the transition easier:
Trigger foods:  Write down a list of the foods that cause cravings. These are the trigger foods you can try to avoid.
Fast food restaurants:  Make a list of  fast food restaurants  that serve healthier foods and note which menu items suit you better. This may prevent a relapse when you’re hungry and not in the mood to cook.
What to eat:  Think about what foods you can eat so you’re prepared to make dietary changes. Preferably, choose healthier foods that you like and already eat regularly.
Pros and cons:  Consider making several copies of the pro-and-con list. Keep a copy in the kitchen, glove compartment, and purse or wallet.
Overcoming a food addiction is difficult. Adding hunger and restrictions to the mix is likely to make things harder.
Consult with a nutrition or healthcare professional to assist you in making a plan. Food addiction is a difficult thing to overcome alone, and the right kind of support can be very helpful.
After taking these preparatory steps, set a date in the near future — like the coming weekend — from which point you won’t touch the  addictive trigger foods  again.

Consider seeking help
Most people with addiction attempt to quit several times before they succeed in the long run.
While it’s possible to overcome addiction without help, you may find it beneficial to seek help.
Many health professionals and support groups can help you to  overcome your addiction.
Finding a psychologist or psychiatrist who has experience in dealing with food addiction can provide one-on-one support, but there are several free group options available as well.
These include 12-step programs, such as:
Overeaters Anonymous
GreySheeters Anonymous
Food Addicts Anonymous
Food Addicts in Recovery Anonymous
These groups meet regularly, some even via video chat, and can offer support to overcome addiction.

The bottom line
Food addiction is a problem that rarely resolves on its own. Unless you make a conscious decision to deal with it, chances are it will worsen over time.
The first steps to overcoming a food addiction include listing the pros and cons of quitting trigger foods, finding healthy food alternatives, and setting a fixed date to start the journey toward health.
Consider seeking help from a health professional or free support group. Always remember that you’re not alone.

References:

https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/how-food-addiction-works
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5946262/
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/binge-eating-disorder
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/13-ways-sugary-soda-is-bad-for-you
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/why-fried-foods-are-bad
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4133846/
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/8-symptoms-of-food-addiction
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/10-causes-of-weight-gain
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7554539/
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/10-healthy-fast-food-restaurants
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/18-most-addictive-foods
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/food-addiction-treatment-find-help
https://www.healthline.comhttps://oa.org/
http://www.greysheet.org/
http://www.foodaddictsanonymous.org/
http://www.foodaddicts.org/
