Title: Are Rice Krispies Gluten-Free?

Whether you’re following a gluten-free diet due to a health issue or personal preference, figuring out which foods are gluten-free can be challenging.
Apart from the basics like wheat, barley, and rye, many other ingredients in your diet may contain gluten as well.
Rice Krispies are a popular product and breakfast staple for many people around the globe.
This article takes a closer look at whether Rice Krispies are gluten-free.

Rice Krispies Ingredients
Rice Krispies are made from rice, which is  naturally gluten-free .
However, certain types contain additives and ingredients that may harbor gluten.
For example, Rice Krispies from Kellogg’s include malt syrup, which is a type of sweetener produced from  barley .
Like wheat and rye, barley is a grain that naturally contains gluten ( 1 ).
Therefore, those with celiac disease or a sensitivity to gluten should avoid products made from barley, including malt syrup.
Due to their malt syrup content, Rice Krispies, as well as store-bought Rice Krispies treats, are off-limits if you’re following a gluten-free diet.
Many types of Rice Krispies and Rice Krispies treats are made with malt syrup, which contains gluten. People with celiac disease or gluten sensitivity should avoid eating these products.

Gluten-free varieties
Though Kellogg’s Rice Krispies contain gluten, several other brands produce crisped rice cereals that are similar and free of gluten.
Look for rice based cereals from brands like One Degree, Nature’s Path, or Barbara’s — all of which can be safely enjoyed by those with  celiac disease  or a sensitivity to gluten.
Gluten-free alternatives to Rice Krispies treats are also available from retailers like Annie’s or Glenny’s.
Be sure to opt for products that are certified gluten-free to prevent cross-contamination and reduce your risk of exposure.
Alternatively, you can try making your own crisped rice cereal treats to take full control of what you’re putting on your plate.
Along with your choice of gluten-free rice cereal, you can easily make crisped rice cereal treats with just a few ingredients, including marshmallows,  butter , and salt.
Some brands produce gluten-free alternatives to Rice Krispies and Rice Krispies treats. Alternatively, you can try making your own crisped rice cereal treats for a simple, gluten-free snack.

How to check for gluten
When searching for gluten-free crisped rice cereals, it’s important to always  read the ingredient list  carefully.
Specific ingredients that indicate that a product may contain gluten include:
wheat, wheat starch, wheat flour, and wheat protein
rye
barley, barley flour, and barley flakes
malt, malt extract, malt syrup, malt vinegar, and malt flavoring
brewer’s yeast
graham flour
durum
semolina
spelt
bulgur
Additionally, if you have celiac disease or a  sensitivity to gluten , it’s best to look for products that are certified gluten-free.
These products must meet strict manufacturing and production guidelines to ensure that they’re safe for those following a gluten-free diet ( 2 ).
Selecting certified gluten-free products can also reduce the risk of cross-contamination to prevent adverse effects in people with a sensitivity to gluten.
To find gluten-free products, be sure to check the ingredient label and select certified gluten-free products whenever possible.

The bottom line
While several varieties of gluten-free crisped rice cereals and crisped rice cereal treats are available, some types — including Kellogg’s Rice Krispies — contain malt syrup, which harbors gluten.
When picking  gluten-free products , it’s important to check the ingredient label carefully and look for foods that are certified gluten-free.
Alternatively, try making your own crisped rice cereal treats at home using your choice of gluten-free rice cereal and a few simple ingredients, such as marshmallows, butter, and salt.

References:

https://www.healthline.com/health/food-nutrition/is-rice-gluten-free
https://www.healthline.com/health/food-nutrition/is-barley-gluten-free
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28244676
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/celiac-disease-symptoms
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/is-butter-dairy
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/how-to-read-food-labels
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/gluten-sensitivity-is-real
https://www.healthline.comhttps://gfco.org/
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/gluten-free-foods
