Title: 7 Best Keto Ice Creams

Most ice cream is high in carbs, but there are low carb versions made with plant fibers and sugar alcohols instead of added sugar. This makes them suitable for the keto diet.
The keto diet involves drastically reducing your carb intake while eating the majority of your calories from fat and a moderate amount of calories from protein.
Keto ice cream can also be made at home using a combination of fat and sugar substitutes.

A quick look at the best keto ice creams
Best with real cream:   Rebel Creamery
Best without sugar alcohols:   Arctic Zero
Best variety pack:  Enlightened Keto
Best under 200 calories:  Halo Top
Best dairy-free:  So Delicious No Sugar Added Coconutmilk Frozen Dessert
Best all-keto product line:   KETO Foods
Best budget:   Breyer’s Carb Smart

How we chose
We chose these keto ice creams based on the following criteria:
Vetting.  All the products included have been vetted to ensure that they meet Healthline’s medical and business standards.
Consumer popularity.  We looked for keto ice creams with rave reviews from customers who rated these ice creams on their flavor and texture.
Accessibility online and in stores.  Ice cream is something that doesn’t necessarily ship well. We looked for ice cream that you can find in stores near you so when the craving strikes, your sweet treat won’t be too far away.
Nutritional value in keeping with a keto diet.  We looked for products that were between 10 and 20 grams of carbs per serving.
Here are the top 7 store-bought and homemade keto ice creams.
Some vendors offer ice cream for purchase online. This can be a convenient option as long as safe and timely delivery is guaranteed. Online ordering may not be available in all areas, so you may have to look for products locally.

A word on net carbs
Net carbs is a term used by food manufacturers to describe the carbohydrates left after you subtract  sugar alcohols  and fiber from total carbohydrates. However, the term isn’t regulated by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA).
A lack of regulation on product labels may lead to consumer confusion based on how net carbohydrates are calculated and the potential differences between brands and labels ( 1 ).
Both net carbs and total carbohydrates are listed for each variety of ice cream so that you can make the best decision for your diet.

Healthline’s picks for best keto ice creams
Price : $5.99 per pint
Ingredients  (Butter Pecan flavor): cream, water, roasted pecans (pecans, butter, coconut oil, salt), erythritol, vegetable glycerin, egg yolks, chicory root fiber, milk protein isolate, natural vanilla flavor, salt, Peruvian carob gum, guar gum, monk fruit
Other flavors (Rebel offers 23 flavor varieties, 10 are listed below ):  Vanilla Chocolate Cookie Dough Peanut Butter Fudge Mint Chip Strawberry Coffee Chip Black Raspberry Cherry Chip Triple Chocolate
Vanilla
Chocolate
Cookie Dough
Peanut Butter Fudge
Mint Chip
Strawberry
Coffee Chip
Black Raspberry
Cherry Chip
Triple Chocolate
Rebel uses cream instead of skim milk in its ice cream. This shows in the nutrients, with many flavors topping 20 grams of total fat and over 200 calories per serving.
When reviewing Rebel’s nutrition facts, you may also notice that the brand doesn’t follow conventional rounding rules for nutrients when calculating net carbs. Sugar alcohol content, carbohydrates, and fiber are listed with the decimal point versus rounded.
As with all keto-friendly ice creams, the varieties are low in net carbs, but Rebel also emphasizes using  low glycemic index  ingredients to set itself apart from other keto-friendly ice creams on the market.
Low glycemic index ingredients may be beneficial for blood sugar management in certain populations ( 2 ). Most people on a keto diet need to eat fewer than 50 grams of carbohydrates per day to achieve ketosis, but some people need to reduce carbs even more ( 3 ).  With 2 grams of net carbs and 13 grams of total carbohydrates per serving, Rebel’s Butter Pecan is a tasty treat that can fit into the keto diet.
However, it’s important to note that compared with regular ice cream, Rebel contains more calories per serving. This is to be expected with some keto-friendly ice creams due to their higher fat content.  Pints are available for purchase online and at several major grocery stores.
Per 2/3 cup (89 grams) Butter Pecan flavor ( 4 ):
Calories:  230
Fat:  24 grams
Carbs:  13 grams
Fiber:  3 grams
Sugar alcohol:  8 grams
Net carbs:  2 grams
Protein:  3 grams
Anyone looking to calculate daily carbohydrates down to the decimal point should choose this keto-friendly ice cream.
Those sensitive to high FODMAP fiber sources should skip this keto-friendly ice cream, as it contains chicory root fiber, a source of fructans.
Price : $5.29 per pint
Ingredients  (Cake Batter flavor): purified water, organic cane sugar, allulose, sugarcane fiber, and/or vegetable fiber, faba bean protein concentrate, gum blend (acacia, tara, guar), natural flavors, sea salt, turmeric, monk fruit concentrate
Other flavors: Classic Vanilla Pistachio Cookie Shake Purely Chocolate Salted Caramel Chocolate Peanut Butter Hint of Mint
Classic Vanilla
Pistachio
Cookie Shake
Purely Chocolate
Salted Caramel
Chocolate Peanut Butter
Hint of Mint
This keto-friendly, dairy-free ice cream is made with a combination of plant fibers and faba bean protein. The Arctic Zero company touts the benefits of faba bean protein as being both allergy- and environmentally-friendly ( 5 ).  Arctic Zero stands out in the keto-friendly ice cream market because of its lack of sugar alcohols. This may make the brand a better choice for those with a digestive condition that makes them sensitive to sugar alcohol intake ( 6 ).  In addition to the lack of sugar alcohol, Arctic Zero ice cream is lower in calories than other keto-friendly ice creams. However, it’s also fat-free, which may not be the right choice for keeping fat intake high when following a strict keto diet.
Arctic Zero pints can be purchased online, as well as at several grocery stores.
Per 2/3 cup (83 grams) Arctic Zero Cake Batter flavor ( 7 ):
Calories:  50
Fat : 0 grams
Carbs:  11 grams
Fiber:  3 grams
Sugar alcohol:  0 grams
Net carbs : 8 grams
Protein:  2 gram
Anyone looking to avoid sugar alcohols and/or those with multiple food allergies.
People following a strict ketogenic diet may want to skip this ice cream if they’re struggling to meet their daily fat intake as it’s fat-free.
Price : $9 per pint
Ingredients  (Chocolate Peanut Butter flavor): cream, water, peanuts, egg yolks, non-GMO soluble corn fiber, erythritol, allulose, dutched cocoa, peanut oil, milk protein concentrate, vegetable glycerin, tara gum, guar gum, monk fruit extract, salt
Other flavors:  P.B. Cookie & Brownie Dough Caramel Chocolate Double Dough Butter Pecan Chocolate Peanut Butter Red Velvet Chocolate Glazed Donut Peanut Butter Fudge Mint Chocolate Chunk Coffee Chocolate Chunk
P.B. Cookie & Brownie Dough
Caramel Chocolate Double Dough
Butter Pecan
Chocolate Peanut Butter
Red Velvet
Chocolate Glazed Donut
Peanut Butter Fudge
Mint Chocolate Chunk
Coffee Chocolate Chunk
Enlightened Keto offers a variety pack of keto-friendly ice creams that comes with eight pints. The brand also offers other types of ice creams, including dairy-free and light varieties in addition to the keto-friendly line.
The product line also includes cheesecakes, cookies, and various other desserts.
One serving of Enlightened Keto Chocolate Peanut Butter contains 21 grams fat, 14 grams carbohydrate, and 7 grams net carbs making it a good option when following the keto diet.
However, like other ice creams on this list, it’s made predominately with cream, which contributes a significant source of saturated fat. Low carbohydrate diets high in saturated fat have been associated with negative health outcomes ( 8 ).
Per 2/3 cup (88 grams) Enlightened Keto Chocolate Peanut Butter flavor ( 9 ):
Calories:  230
Fat:  21 grams
Carbs:  14 grams
Fiber:  4 grams
Sugar alcohol:  3 grams
Net carbs:  7 grams
Protein:  5 grams
Enlightened Keto ice cream is a good choice if you need a sweet treat that will help you meet your daily fat goals.
If you have a nut allergy, this brand may not be the best for you as only a few flavor varieties are nut-free.
Price : $5.99 per pint
Ingredients  (Macadamia Nut Cookie flavor): ultrafiltered skim milk, cream, erythritol, eggs, vegetable glycerine, soluble corn fiber, inulin, macadamia nuts, sugar, skim milk, contains 1% or less of natural flavors, coconut oil, corn starch, salt, stevia leaf extract (Reb M), sunflower lecithin, stevia leaf extract (Reb A), citric acid, cellulose gel, cellulose gum
Other flavors: Mint Chocolate Cookie Turtle Cheesecake Banana Cream Pie Brownie a la mode Caramel Butter Pecan Chocolate Caramel Lava Cake Chocolate Cheesecake Peanut Butter Chocolate Vanilla Bean
Mint Chocolate Cookie
Turtle Cheesecake
Banana Cream Pie
Brownie a la mode
Caramel Butter Pecan
Chocolate Caramel Lava Cake
Chocolate Cheesecake
Peanut Butter Chocolate
Vanilla Bean
Halo Top  is a low carb option that’s higher in protein than most other keto-friendly ice creams. The brand offers 10 flavors of keto-friendly ice creams with a range of 5 to 10 grams of net carbs per pint and 200 calories or less per serving.
Macadamia Nut Cookie flavor is a top-rated variety and contains skim milk, eggs, and prebiotic fiber. It’s primarily sweetened with erythritol, a zero-calorie sugar alcohol ( 10 ,  11 ). You can purchase Halo Top ice creams online and at most major grocery stores. Halo Top also offers varieties that are made without dairy and eggs.
Per 2/3 cup (85 grams) Macadamia Nut Cookie flavor ( 12 ):
Calories:  150
Fat:  11 grams
Carbs:  15 grams
Fiber:  3 grams
Sugar alcohol:  9 grams
Net carbs:  3 grams
Protein:  6 grams
Choose this keto-friendly ice cream if you’re looking for a sweet treat that’s 200 calories or less per serving.
Skip this variety if you’re sensitive to inulin, a prebiotic fiber.
Price : $5.99
Ingredients  (Vanilla Bean flavor): organic coconutmilk (filtered water, organic coconut), chicory root extract, acacia gum, erythritol, vegetable glycerin, pea protein, guar gum, sea salt, locust bean gum, monk fruit extract, natural flavor, vanilla bean specks
Other flavors: Mint Chip Chocolate Butter Pecan Cookies N’ Cream
Mint Chip
Chocolate
Butter Pecan
Cookies N’ Cream
So Delicious offers a full dairy-free product line that includes cheese and yogurt alternatives, plant-based beverages, and plant-based frozen desserts.
The dairy-free no sugar added ice creams are a keto-friendly alternative to dairy-based varieties.
One serving of the vanilla flavor provides 130 calories and 9 grams of total fat. It’s slightly higher in carbohydrates than other keto-friendly ice creams with 24 grams of total carbohydrates and 10 grams of net carbs.
Per 2/3 cup (113 grams) Vanilla Bean flavor ( 13 ):
Calories:  130
Fat : 9 grams
Carbs:  24 grams
Fiber:  10 grams
Sugar alcohol:  4 grams
Net carbs : 10 grams
Protein:  2 gram
Choose this if you’re looking for a plant-based keto-friendly ice cream with no added sugar and 10 grams of net carbs.
Skip this ice cream if you have a tree nut allergy, as it contains coconut.
Price : $9.99
Ingredients  (Peanut Butter Fudge Swirl): cream, water, peanut butter cup (unsweetened chocolate, erythritol, cocoa butter, steviol glycosides, sunflower lecithin, peanut butter (peanuts, salt), coconut oil, peanut oil, whole milk powder, soy lecithin), egg yolk, erythritol, peanut oil, chicory root fiber, milk protein concentrate, tapioca fiber, cocoa processed with alkali, cocoa, whey, sea salt, vegetable glycerin, vanilla extract, sunflower lecithin, guar gum, steviol glycosides, monk fruit extract, gum acacia
Other flavors: Cake Batter Triple Chocolate Brownie Black Raspberry Butter Pecan Cherry Chip Cookie Dough Strawberry Peanut Butter Cup Mint Chip Sea Salt Caramel
Cake Batter
Triple Chocolate Brownie
Black Raspberry
Butter Pecan
Cherry Chip
Cookie Dough
Strawberry
Peanut Butter Cup
Mint Chip
Sea Salt Caramel
KETO Foods, founded in 2018, has a line of products including ice cream pints, ice cream bars, and chocolate all made with the keto diet in mind.
Using a combination of cream, egg yolks, and erythritol as primary ingredients makes this keto-friendly ice cream high in fat, but relatively low in total carbohydrates.
The peanut butter fudge swirl ice cream is one of the more popular flavors. One serving contains 250 calories, 22 grams of carbohydrates, and 3 grams of net carbs.
Total calories per serving vary depending on the flavor, ranging from 180 to 250 calories per 2/3 cup.
You can order KETO Foods from the company’s website or by using their store locator to find the product near you.
Per 2/3 cup (100 grams) Peanut Butter Fudge Swirl ( 14 ):
Calories:  250
Fat : 23 grams
Carbs:  22 grams
Fiber:  7 grams
Sugar alcohol:  12 grams
Net carbs : 3 grams
Protein:  5 grams
Pick KETO Pints if you’re looking for a keto-friendly ice cream with a higher fat content.
If you have an egg or dairy allergy, skip this brand, as all flavors are made with a cream and egg yolk base.
Price : $4.99 per pint
Ingredients (Coffee Cookie Crunch) : skim milk, cream, maltitol syrup, water, polydextrose, coconut oil, glycerin, coffee extract, whey, less than 2% of: sugar, dutched cocoa (process with alkali), soluble corn fiber, enriched wheat flour (wheat flour, niacin, reduced iron, thiamin mononitrate, riboflavin, folic acid), mono and diglycerides, vegetable oil (soybean, palm), guar gum, carob bean gum, dried cane syrup, natural flavor, cocoa, soy lecithin, corn starch, sodium bicarbonate, milk, salt, acesulfame potassium, sucralose
Other flavors :  Brownie a la Mode Mint Fudge Cookie Chocolate Chocolate Chip Mint Chip Vanilla Chocolate
Brownie a la Mode
Mint Fudge Cookie
Chocolate Chocolate Chip
Mint Chip
Vanilla
Chocolate
The ketogenic diet consists of majority fat, moderate protein, and low carbohydrate intake. While the Breyer’s Carb Smart ice cream is lower in fat than many other keto-friendly ice creams, it can still fit into a keto diet due to its total carbohydrate content.
The total carbohydrates per serving of this ice cream are amongst the lowest when compared with other brands listed. However, it doesn’t have as much fat per serving, which may make it challenging to kit into a strict ketogenic diet.
You can order Breyer’s Carb Smart from their website or by using their store locator to find the product near you.
Per 2/3 cup (77 grams) Coffee Cookie Crunch flavor ( 15 ):
Calories:  120
Fat : 6 grams
Carbs:  17 grams
Fiber:  4 grams
Sugar alcohol:  8 grams
Net carbs : 5 grams
Protein:  2 gram
If you need a budget-friendly low carb ice cream, consider choosing Breyer’s Carb Smart.
If you’re looking for a higher fat to carbohydrate ratio, skip this variety, as it’s relatively low in fat as compared with other keto ice cream brands.

Comparing keto ice cream brands

At-home recipes for keto-friendly ice cream
Making keto ice cream at home is easy, so long as you have  low carb sweeteners  on hand.
This version of keto ice cream is made with erythritol, which you can buy online and at some grocery stores.
To make it, whisk together 2 cups (500 mL) of canned full fat coconut milk, 1/4 cup (48 grams) of erythritol, and 1 teaspoon (5 mL) of vanilla extract. Pour it into ice cube trays and freeze it for a few hours.
Add the frozen cubes to a blender and blend until creamy and smooth before serving. This recipe yields about 4 servings.
Per 1/2 cup serving:
Calories:  226
Fat:  24 grams
Carbs:  3 grams
Fiber:  0 grams
Sugar alcohol:  12 grams
Net carbs:  0 grams
Protein:  2 grams
Since  berries  are lower in carbs than most other fruits, they’re a great addition to homemade keto ice cream.
To make low carb strawberry ice cream at home, blend 2 cups (500 mL) of heavy cream with 1/4 cup (60 grams) of sour cream, 1/2 cup (100 grams) of fresh strawberries, and 1/3 cup (64 grams) of erythritol or Swerve (a low carb sweetener).
Transfer the mixture to a loaf pan and freeze for 3–5 hours, until it’s hard and ready to serve. This recipe makes 4 servings.
Per 1/2 cup serving:
Calories:  454
Fat:  45 grams
Carbs:  6 grams
Fiber:  0 grams
Sugar alcohol:  16 grams
Net carbs:  0 grams
Protein:  5 grams


How to choose
It’s important to consider a few key points when choosing a keto-friendly ice cream:
Total carbohydrates.  The ketogenic diet requires a very low intake of total carbohydrates. Pick a keto-friendly ice cream that’s low in total carbohydrates relative to the rest of your daily carbohydrate intake. For most keto-friendly ice creams, this number will fall between 10 and 20 grams of carbohydrates per serving.
Type of fat.  Following a ketogenic diet requires that the majority of total calories come from fat. However, the type of fat in the diet is important for health. A low carb diet consisting of majority saturated fat has been associated with negative health outcomes. When choosing a keto-friendly ice cream, opt for a variety that is lower in saturated fat.
Type of fiber.  Many keto-friendly ice creams have added fiber. Ice cream isn’t a traditional source of added fiber, so it’s important to consider its presence in the context of your diet. Additionally, inulin, a prebiotic fiber, may result in digestive upset for some people. It’s important to check the ingredient list for the fiber source.
Sugar alcohols.  Adding sugar alcohols to keto-friendly ice creams helps achieve sweetness while also keeping total carbohydrate and sugar low. However, for some people, the addition of sugar alcohols can be an issue. If you need to avoid sugar alcohols, opt for a keto-friendly ice cream made with an alternative sugar substitute such as  allulose .
Allergens.  Many keto-friendly ice creams are made using one of the major allergens. If you’re allergic, be sure to check the label for the presence of them.

Frequently asked questions
Since the keto diet requires eating extremely low carbohydrates and high fat, it’s best to choose an ice cream that meets the same nutritional profile.
Choose a keto-friendly ice cream that’s low in total carbohydrates while also contributing the majority of the calories from fat. This often means choosing an ice cream made with cream and an additional fat source like oil listed in the first five ingredients.
Keto-friendly ice cream is often higher in total calories than regular ice cream because of its high fat content. However, it’s also lower in added sugar than regular ice cream.
Combined, these facts could make keto-friendly ice cream a better choice if you’re looking to reduce added sugar. However, the higher calories in keto ice cream may be a detriment to anyone who needs to follow a calorie-restricted diet.
Keto ice cream differs from regular ice cream in both nutrients and ingredients. Keto ice cream is often higher in calories and fat than regular ice cream due to the higher fat ingredients.
However, keto ice cream is lower in carbohydrates than regular ice cream since sugar substitutes are used as sweeteners in place of regular sugar.
It’s also common for keto ice cream to have significantly more fiber than regular ice cream due to fiber additives that influence taste and texture while keeping total carbohydrates low.
No, keto ice cream is not less fattening than regular ice cream. In fact, in many cases, keto ice cream has more fat per serving because it has oil or other fat sources added to purposefully increase the total fat.
Yes, you can choose to eat regular ice cream on a keto diet if it fits within your daily carbohydrate needs required on the keto diet. Remember, regular ice cream is higher in carbohydrates than keto ice cream, so be sure to check the label to ensure you’re within your daily carbohydrate limits.

The bottom line
Several low carb ice creams can be enjoyed on a  keto diet .
Keep in mind that despite the low carbohydrates found in keto-friendly ice cream, these products are not low calorie. The higher fat and calorie content of keto ice cream may not be appropriate for certain populations, such as those following a low calorie or low fat diet.
Still, if you want a keto-friendly product to satisfy your craving for ice cream, refer to this list.

Food Fix: Keto Basics


References:

https://www.healthline.com#rebel
https://www.healthline.com#arctic
https://www.healthline.com#enlightened
https://www.healthline.com#halo
https://www.healthline.com#sodelicious
https://www.healthline.com#keto
https://www.healthline.com#breyers
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/sugar-alcohols-good-or-bad
https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2016-05-27/pdf/2016-11867.pdf
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/glycemic-index
https://www.healthline.comhttps://academic.oup.com/ajcn/article/110/4/891/5543221?login=false
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3826507/
https://www.healthline.comhttps://rebelcreamery.com/products/butter-pecan
https://www.arcticzero.com/the-magic-of-faba/
https://www.healthline.comhttps://bmcnutr.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s40795-020-00374-3
https://www.arcticzero.com/cake-batter/
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fnut.2021.702802/full#h6
https://www.healthline.comhttps://eatenlightened.com/collections/high-protein-low-sugar-ice-cream-pints/products/chocolate-peanut-butter-ice-cream-pint
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/halo-top-ice-cream
https://www.healthline.comhttps://halotop.com/keto-ice-cream/macadamia-nut-cookie
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5756564/
https://www.healthline.comhttps://halotop.com/keto-ice-cream/macadamia-nut-cookie
https://www.healthline.comhttps://sodeliciousdairyfree.com/dairy-free-foods/dairy-free-frozen-desserts/coconutmilk/no-sugar-added-vanilla-bean
https://www.healthline.comhttps://ketofoods.com/products/peanut-butter-fudge-swirl-ice-cream
https://www.breyers.com/us/en/products/better-for-you/carbsmart-coffee-cookie-crumble.html
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/keto-sweeteners
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/11-reasons-to-eat-berries
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/allulose
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/ketogenic-diet-101
