Title: The 9 Best Blenders for Smoothies

Here are our picks for the best blenders for smoothies, because few things are worse than holding down the button on one that isn’t up to the task.
Smoothies have been one of the most popular food trends over the last several decades, and it’s easy to understand why.
They’re a delicious and convenient way to boost your nutrient intake and add more diversity to your diet. Plus, they’re fully customizable — you can adjust the ingredients according to your mood, taste preferences, or dietary goals.
Perhaps the best thing about smoothies is how easy they are to throw together. They require very little time and just a few essential kitchen tools, and both preparation and cleanup are a breeze.

A quick look at the best blenders
Best overall:   Blendtec Classic 575
Best high power:   Vitamix Pro 750
Best for single-serve batches:   Nutribullet Pro
Best for large batches:   Ninja BL660 Professional
Best for quiet blending:   Breville Fresh and Furious
Best budget:   Oster MyBlend
Most durable:   Vitamix E310 Explorian
Best with smart features:   KitchenAid K400 Variable Speed
Best design:   Zwilling Enfinigy Countertop Power Blender

How we chose the best blenders
The secret to a great smoothie is a great blender. But with so many options to choose from, it can be difficult to know exactly which one is the best fit for you.
We chose our top 9 blenders with the following factors in mind:
Price:  We’ve chosen blenders for a range of budgets. A pricing guide is included below.
Power and speed:  Higher wattage means more power and speed. However, other factors, such as the shape of the container and blade type, will make a difference as well.
Volume:  The size of the blender container is included in each blender’s description. This is important if you’re looking for a blender that can prepare large batches or has a to-go container option.
Hands-on experience : Nothing compares to feedback from experience. Experts and foodies shared their favorite features about the models they own, love, and use at home.
Warranty:  All options on our list come with a warranty.
Other factors:  We considered factors such as technology integration, noise level, and accessories.
$  = under $120
$$  = $120–$300
$$$  = over $300

Healthline’s picks for best blenders for making smoothies
Price:  $$$
Power:  1,560 watts
Speeds:  5
Volume:  32 ounces (oz)
Warranty:  2 years (option to extend)
The Blendtec Classic 575 has two timed settings, a smoothie button, and a pulse option. It’s available with either a 32-oz (946-milliliter [mL]) container or a larger, 36-oz (1-liter [L]) container. However, the larger container does come at a higher price.  It’s more compact than many similar blenders, which is great for anyone trying to save on counter space. It has a preprogrammed cleaning setting and is dishwasher-safe. These features combined make this blender our pick for the best blender for smoothies.
It’s even powerful and durable enough to be a top pick for people who blend food for  feeding tubes . “For food to get through a feeding tube, it needs to be smooth like pancake batter,” says dietitian Jennifer Akimoto, MAN, RD, who uses this blender and recommends it to clients.  The loud noise and higher price point are the main downsides to this blender. However, it’s made with high quality, durable materials and comes with a standard 2-year manufacturer warranty.
multiple speed settings
high wattage
large container size available
dishwasher-safe
loud
expensive
Price:  $$$
Power:  1,200 watts
Speeds:  10
Volume:  64 oz
Warranty:  7 years (option to extend)
Vitamix is well known for its high end home blenders, offering 4 series, 11 models, and several blender varieties and bundles.
The models differ in pre-programmed settings, speed controls, displays, size, and other features such as pulse settings, timers, warranties, and color. We’ve included the Vitamix Pro 750, which is part of the Legacy series, and a blender from the Explorian series in our list of best blenders.
The Vitamix Pro 750 is a professional-grade blender. Its high wattage and 10 speed settings make it our top pick for a high power blender.
It features stainless steel blades, 5 pre-programmed settings, and a container that holds up to 64 oz (1.9 L).
“Even the most fibrous of ingredients are no match for this blender offering a smooth, consistent, and creamy texture and mouthfeel every time,” says dietitian Dani Lebovitz, MS, RDN, founder of Kid Food Explorers in Franklin, Tennessee.
This blender has a self-cleaning feature, which is helpful if you’re hoping to avoid taking it apart for cleaning. “When you’re done, just add warm water with a drop of dish soap to the container, and it will clean itself,” Lebovitz adds.
However, this blender is not dishwasher-safe, which may be a drawback for some.
While this blender is powerful and has multiple settings, some people report that it’s very noisy. It’s also more expensive than other blenders on our list.
Still, Vitamix is renowned for durability and quality, and its products come with a 7-year warranty. Another foodie we spoke with said, “Vitamix is a workhorse,” and this seems to be the consensus among users.
Many people find the high cost worth the investment, as these blenders are built to last.
multiple speed settings
pre-programmed settings to help with consistency
durable
7-year warranty
expensive
loud
not dishwasher-safe
Price:  $
Power:  900 watts
Speeds:  1
Volume:  32 oz
Warranty:  1-year limited (option to extend)
If you’re short on kitchen space or just want a machine to make single-serve smoothies, then the Nutribullet Pro might be the best option for you.
This blender is simple to use, with just one speed setting. It has enough power to blend ingredients into a smooth puree but may need more time to do so than blenders with higher wattage.
The blades are removable, making it easy to clean. Plus, the cups are dishwasher-safe, which is helpful if you prefer to avoid handwashing your dishes. It also comes with flip-top drinking lids, so it’s a great choice for anyone who likes to drink their smoothies on the go.
These features make it our top pick for single-serve batches.
The most frequently reported downsides are that it’s loud, it doesn’t reliably crush large chunks of ice, and its blades are susceptible to wearing down. Also, be wary of throwing nuts in, as they may not blend smoothly.
However, it comes with a limited 1-year manufacturer warranty and is considerably more affordable than other blenders on the list.
Another recommended model that’s even less expensive is the Nutribullet 600. It’s less powerful by 300 watts but quieter and lighter in weight. “Super easy to make smoothies and can carry around if need be,” says Parisa Syed, an associate editor at Healthline.
relatively affordable
easy to clean
dishwasher-safe
compact
less durable than other blenders
lower wattage than larger blenders
has difficulty blending ice
Price:  $
Power:  1,100 watts
Speeds:  3
Volume:  72 oz
Warranty:  multiple options available
If you’re looking for an affordable, high performance blender, the Ninja BL660 Professional is a great choice.
With an 1,100-watt motor and a 6-blade design, it easily crushes ice and blends a variety of  fresh and frozen produce  into a uniform smoothie consistency, making it our top pick for large batches.
“It’s fast and efficient and durable,” says Shaina Sidoti, chef and CEO at Effortlessly Healthy, a meal delivery service that relies on this blender to mass-produce foods.
The blender comes with a 72-oz (2.1-L) container and two single-serve 16-oz (472-mL) blender cups. Plus, it’s easy to clean, as all the parts are dishwasher-safe.
The biggest user complaint is that it’s loud and not as durable as more expensive blenders. “If you lose one piece, you might as well buy the entire unit vs. individual pieces,” says Sidoti.
Many people also report that the lid tends to leak when they make juices or other liquid-based items with very thin consistencies.
relatively affordable
multiple container sizes included with purchase
dishwasher-safe
loud
lid may leak when blending thinner consistencies
high cost for replacement parts
Price:  $$
Power:  1,100 watts
Speeds:  5
Volume:  50 oz
Warranty:  3-year limited
If you’re looking for a high powered blender that doesn’t make too much noise, consider the Breville Fresh and Furious. Most of the blenders on our list are loud, according to users, but this blender’s reduced noise makes it our top pick for quiet blending.
It has a sleek low-profile design and runs quietly on its own without needing a bulky external enclosure to muffle the sound.
But just because it’s quiet doesn’t mean it won’t perform. The 1,100-watt motor is powerful enough to crush ice, and it has separate preprogrammed settings for fruit- and vegetable-based smoothies.
The blender pitcher has a moderate 50-oz (1.5-L) capacity, and the 60-second self-cleaning feature means you don’t have to take anything apart to get it ready for its next use.
The main downside is that it occasionally has trouble pureeing large pieces of ice or frozen fruit and veggies, so you may need to run the blend cycle twice to get a smooth consistency.
Many people also report that it isn’t strong enough to pulverize nuts into nut butter. If you like using nuts in your smoothies, you may want to stick with premade  nut butters  when using this blender.
relatively affordable
quiet
multiple speed settings
may blend inconsistently
only one container included with purchase
Price:  $
Power:  250 watts
Speeds:  1
Volume:  20 oz
Warranty:  1-year limited
If you’re looking for a single-serve blender at an affordable price, then the Oster MyBlend is one of the best options, at less than half the price of the Nutribullet personal blender.
This blender is compact enough to easily fit in a kitchen cabinet or keep out of the way on the countertop. At 250 watts, it’s not as powerful as some of the other blenders on our list, but it works well for small batches.
The blender comes with a 20-oz (591-mL) container and a travel-friendly lid to make it easy to take your drink to go. Plus, it’s simple to use, with only one speed setting. These features combined make it our top budget pick.
However, there’s no timed blending option — you have to continuously press the button to blend.
Cleaning the blender is easy. The container is dishwasher-safe, and the blade is removable.
One of the downsides of this blender is that the container often separates from the blade and base after blending. Users report needing to flip the full blender upside down to remove the cup without spilling the contents.
Additionally, this blender may not be as durable as others on our list — but it comes with a 1-year limited warranty.
affordable
compact
travels easily
less durable than other blenders
may cause a mess when removing container from base after blending
one speed setting and no timed blending option
Price:  $$
Power:  1,400 watts
Speeds:  10
Volume:  48 oz
Warranty:  5 years (option to extend)
This blender, which offers the power and durability of the Vitamix Pro 750 at about half the price, is our pick for the most durable blender.
“It’s many years old now and is still very powerful,” says Shannon Meadows, RDN, LDN, a registered dietitian in Bel Air, Maryland.
Its durability isn’t diminished by heavy use, either. “It blends oats and other grains into flour easily, demolishes frozen fruits and veggies in smoothies, and blends and chops nuts with no problem,” Meadows adds.
However, it’s still more expensive than most other blenders on this list.
The Vitamix E310 Explorian comes with a 48-oz (1.4-L) container that’s easy to clean with the self-cleaning option. It’s also dishwasher-safe.
One downside of this blender is the noise level. Many users report that it’s very loud when blending. Additionally, some say the blender moves on the counter while blending, so you may have to hold it in place.
dishwasher-safe
10 speed settings and a pulse option
5-year warranty
loud
expensive
may move while blending
Price:  $$
Power:  1,200 watts
Speeds:  5
Volume:  56 oz
Warranty:  5 years
The KitchenAid K400 is a 1,200-watt blender with 5 speed settings and 3 preset programs. It comes with a 56-oz (1.6-L) container that’s easy to clean with the machine’s self-cleaning feature.
Optional add-ons for on-the-go beverages are available, including 16-oz and 6-oz containers, both with travel-friendly lids.
Unique to the KitchenAid K400 is a feature that senses the contents of the container and adjusts the speed of the motor accordingly. This feature makes it our pick for the best blender with smart functionality.
The downsides of this blender are the reported noise level and lack of durability. Some users say the motor begins to smoke with heavier use.
However, the blender comes with a 5-year warranty and a 90-day money-back guarantee.
1200-watt power and 5 speed settings
5-year warranty and 90-day money-back guarantee
multiple container options available
loud
relatively expensive
less durable than other blenders
Price:  $$
Power:  1,400 watts
Speed2:  12
Volume:  64 oz
Warranty:  limited warranty
The Zwilling Enfinigy features a sleek design with an LED display that turns off when not in use.
It has six preset programs for a variety of preparations, from crushed ice to smoothies. Plus, the container is dishwasher-safe for easy cleanup.
The Zwilling Enfinigy has a few unique features, including a free app for operating the blender, a lid that doubles as a measuring cup, and a safety locking feature to ensure that the blender doesn’t turn on unless the lid is properly secured.
One of the downsides of this blender is user-reported difficulty with cleaning. Some users say food gets stuck in the handle due to the safety lock feature.
However, users also mention its durability, and the blender comes with a manufacturer’s limited warranty.
sleek design
free app
dishwasher-safe
difficult to clean
relatively expensive

What to consider when choosing a blender for smoothies
Here’s what to keep in mind while shopping for a blender:
Price:  Blenders range from under $100 to more than $500. Be sure to consider your budget and how often you’ll be using the blender.
Versatility:  Some blenders are meant to be used for smoothies only, while others can perform a variety of functions. You can find blenders designed for hot items in addition to cold, as well as ones that are made to crush ice and pulverize nuts into nut butter.
Cleaning requirements:  If you prefer to wash items in the dishwasher, be sure to check the manufacturers’ instructions before you buy. Some blenders must be washed by hand.
Warranty:  Warranties can range from 1 year to more than 5 years.
User reviews:  Be sure to check online reviews before you buy. Look at common pros and cons mentioned by users who have put the blender through its paces.
Size:  Do you want something for just a single serving, or would you prefer to make large batches? Some blenders have small cups, while others have a much larger capacity.
Features:  Check for any additional features, such as multiple speeds, pulse modes, and self-cleaning options.

Comparison of the best blenders for smoothies

Frequently asked questions about blenders
The best way to load a blender for smoothies is to start with liquid and then add frozen items such as fruits and vegetables. You can then layer additional ingredients, such as leafy greens and protein powder or nut butter, followed by ice.
Blenders are versatile kitchen appliances that can be used to make purees, soups, and frozen desserts in addition to smoothies. Blenders can also be used to crush ice and to make frozen drinks.
A smoothie maker is usually a single-serve blender intended only for making smoothies. These mini blenders often come with a to-go lid for the single-serve container.
Vacuum blending is a process that removes the oxygen from the blender while blending the contents. It reportedly results in a smoother texture that’s more uniform and doesn’t separate after blending.
It’s important to choose a blender that can handle the ingredients you want to blend into your smoothies.
You’ll want at least 1,500 watts for blending vegetables and fibrous ingredients. For smoothies with less fibrous ingredients, a 500-watt blender may work.
A pulse setting is also a good feature to start the blending process.
A Vitamix blender can handle rougher foods and still get a smooth and creamy texture, while a Ninja may be easier to use and quieter than a Vitamix.
A Blendtec blender has more horsepower than a Vitamix and costs less than some of Vitamix models.

The bottom line
Smoothies are a convenient way to boost your fiber, fruit, and  vegetable intake .
If you’re thinking about getting into a smoothie habit, you need a good blender that’s powerful enough to consistently transform fresh and frozen produce into a smooth, creamy texture.
Before choosing a model, consider how much you want to spend and which features best suit your needs.

References:

https://www.healthline.com#blendtec
https://www.healthline.com#vitamix
https://www.healthline.com#nutribullet
https://www.healthline.com#ninja
https://www.healthline.com#breville
https://www.healthline.com#oster
https://www.healthline.com#vitamixE310
https://www.healthline.com#kitchenaid
https://www.healthline.com#zwilling
https://www.healthline.com/health/nasogastric-intubation-and-feeding
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/fresh-vs-frozen-fruit-and-vegetables
https://www.healthline.com/health/food-nutrition/almond-butter-peanut-butter
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/servings-of-vegetables-per-day
