Title: How We Review Dietary Supplements

While there’s no shortage of dietary supplement options in the United States because the  Food and Drug Administration (FDA)  doesn’t regulate supplements the way it regulates pharmaceuticals, it can be challenging to know which supplements are actually high quality and worth purchasing.
That’s where Healthline comes in.
Between our extensive vetting process, medical review process, pool of dietitian writers and editors, and hands-on testing, our goal is to help you feel better informed when purchasing supplements and to assure you that we only recommend products that we stand behind.
Dietary supplements are products designed to provide nutrients (and other ingredients) you might not get enough of through diet alone. Examples include multivitamins, fish oil capsules, probiotics, protein powders, and more.
While some people use products, like iron supplements, to correct a nutrient deficiency, others may use them to support specific aspects of health, such as athletic performance or gut health.
However, it’s crucial to distinguish supplements from drugs. Unlike some medications, the intent of dietary supplements isn’t to cure, treat, or prevent diseases.

How we vet dietary supplements
All brands and products featured on Healthline must pass our rigorous  vetting process .
During vetting, we evaluate dietary supplements based on:
objective measures of trust, such as third-party certifications
business standards and company reputation
health claims
requirements for labeling
an overall approach to well-being

How we decide which supplements to recommend
Registered dietitians write and review Healthline’s supplement roundups.
When choosing which products to include, our dietitians consider multiple factors, including:
quality indicators, including third-party testing and certifications
an overall formulation, including the ingredient types and amounts included
ingredient quality
whether nutrients are present in readily available forms and amounts that research shows may be effective
strength of research to support products’ intended benefits or use
an overall value compared with similar products
When it comes to supplements, no “best” product exists for everyone. Nutrient needs, dietary preferences, lifestyle factors, and budget constraints all influence which product might be a good fit for one person and not for another.
Read more: “ How to Choose High Quality Vitamins and Supplements .“

How we test
To provide insights into what it’s like to use a product, we pair Healthline’s team of testers with products based on each tester’s dietary needs, preferences, health goals, and current wellness regimen.
For vitamins, minerals, and herbal supplements, testers receive a 30-day supply, and we ask them to take the supplement daily or as directed on the label. For supplement powders, like protein powders and creatine, we ask testers to prepare the powders as directed on the label.
Factors our testers consider while trying supplements include:
Did the product arrive in good condition?
Were the directions clearly stated on the label?
Was the supplement easy to take?
Were pills easy to swallow? And how big were they?
Was a powder easy to mix? And what was the consistency like?
Was there a noticeable taste or aftertaste?
Did you experience any side effects?
Whether you’re curious to learn more about supplements or find the right product for you,  we’ve got you covered .

References:
https://www.fda.gov/food/dietary-supplements-guidance-documents-regulatory-information/dietary-supplement-labeling-guide
https://www.healthline.com/about/vet-brands-and-products
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/how-to-choose-high-quality-vitamins-and-supplements
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/vitamins-and-supplements