Title: What Is Colloidal Silver, and Is It Safe?

Colloidal silver is a controversial alternative medicine. Advocates claim it may be used to treat a variety of acute and chronic conditions. However, there is no scientific evidence to support these claims, and medical experts warn of potential serious side effects with use.
Colloidal silver is a controversial alternative medicine.
Its advocates claim that it’s an effective treatment for all sorts of infections and diseases, ranging from the common cold to cancer.
However, most medical experts and researchers say that it’s ineffective and may lead to serious side effects.
This article explains what colloidal silver is, then details its uses, health claims, and risks.

Is colloidal silver safe?
Colloidal silver is a popular remedy in alternative medicine.
However, colloidal silver has been declared unsafe by the  Food and Drug Administration (FDA)  since  1999 . In fact, the FDA deemed that all over-the-counter products that contain colloidal silver ingredients or silver salts are  not generally recognized as safe or effective .
Since then, the FDA has not approved any new colloidal silver drugs on the market. However, this product is still commonly sold as a dietary supplement.
Any company that produces silver products that are labeled or promoted to prevent or cure disease must undergo FDA approval prior to marketing. Otherwise, the product is considered misbranded and is subject to regulatory action.
Consumption of colloidal silver is associated with many serious health risks, such as argyria, neurological damage, and liver and kidney harm. It also reduces the absorption and efficacy of certain drugs, such as antibiotics and the thyroid medication thyroxine.
Ultimately, any colloidal silver product intended for oral or topical use isn’t safe or recommended.

What is colloidal silver, and why is it used?
“Colloidal silver” is the term used to describe tiny particles of silver suspended in a liquid.
The size of the silver particles in colloidal silver varies, but some are so tiny that they’re referred to as nanoparticles. This means that they’re  less than 100 nanometers  in size and invisible to the naked eye.
Historically, silver was used as an all-purpose remedy for various infections and illnesses due to its antimicrobial properties. In fact, the earliest recorded use of silver as a medical treatment dates back to the Han Dynasty in China (1500 B.C.).
However, colloidal silver was quickly abandoned in the early 20th century when antibiotics were discovered and found to be more effective than colloidal silver in the treatment of health conditions and disease.
Since the 1990s, colloidal silver has started to regain popularity as an alternative medicine, with advocates claiming that it can replace antibiotics or other medical therapies to treat bacterial, viral, and fungal infections.
A smaller number of people go as far as to assert that it helps treat conditions like Lyme disease, tuberculosis, HIV, and even cancer. However, no research supports these claims.
Today, those who use colloidal silver take it as an oral dietary supplement or apply it directly to their skin.

How do people take colloidal silver?
Though its use is discouraged, colloidal silver can still be found in liquid and spray form. Most products contain very low doses of colloidal silver, usually ranging from  10–30 parts per million  (ppm).
You’ll usually find it labeled as:
colloidal silver spray
silver hydrosol
colloidal silver nebulizer
silver water
silver sol
Typically, colloidal silver products are sold as homeopathic remedies. Homeopathy is based on the premise that very low doses of a substance can produce health benefits, though little research supports this.
Additionally, silver is commonly added to bandages and dressings to help with wound and  burn healing . Common brands names include Acticoat, Allevyn Ag, Aquacel Ag, Biatain Ag, Flamazine, Mepilex Ag, and Silvercel.
Finally, silver is found in other commercial products, such as cleaning agents, agricultural treatments, and personal hygiene products like shower gels and deodorants.

Health claims surrounding colloidal silver
Proponents of colloidal silver claim that it can prevent, cure, and treat many diseases and ailments.
While test-tube research has shown that colloidal silver kills a wide range of  bacteria , fungi, and viruses, it has yet to be proven in human studies due to the risks associated with ingesting colloidal silver.
Further,  no human data  supports consuming colloidal silver to treat or prevent medical conditions like diabetes,  cancer , HIV, digestive issues, and other illnesses.
A major issue is the misinterpretation of the results from test-tube and rodent studies. Although a study may suggest that colloidal silver kills certain strains of bacteria in a lab setting, this finding can’t be applied to humans.
To date, the only effective use of colloidal silver in humans is topical application to wounds and burns. Even then, its benefits are  widely debated .

Is there a danger of argyria?
You’re environmentally exposed to extremely small amounts of silver every day. It’s present in very tiny amounts in drinking water, the food supply, and even the air you breathe.
As a compound, the silver found in the environment is thought to be quite safe.
However, the environmental and health risks of silver nanoparticles aren’t well understood, and ingesting colloidal silver is considered unsafe.
The biggest risk associated with chronic exposure to colloidal silver is a condition known as  argyria , whose name comes from the Greek word “argyros,” meaning silver.
Argyria is a condition that turns your skin a blue-gray color due to the buildup of silver metal particles in your body and skin. Silver deposits may also occur in your intestines, liver, kidneys, and other organs.
You are most at risk of argyria if you’re taking a silver-containing dietary supplement or work in a job that exposes you to large amounts of silver.
To develop argyria, you likely have to ingest silver compounds over a long period of time. However, the exact amounts and timeframe aren’t known.
The real risks of ingesting silver nanoparticles, which are present in colloidal silver products, are also unknown. However, since these particles may easily pass into various organs like your gut, skin, or lungs, they’re considered a probable health risk.
Numerous  case   studies  have found that silver intake from colloidal silver dietary supplements may lead to argyria.
While argyria isn’t inherently harmful, it’s irreversible and likely permanent. That said, since little research is available on the side effects of colloidal silver, there may be other unknown side effects.
If you use silver frequently on an open wound, you  may experience  localized argyria due to a buildup of silver in the surrounding tissue — though this condition is rare.
According to the  Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) , you should keep your daily silver exposure to no more than 2.27 mcg per pound of body weight (5 mcg per kg). Yet, since that’s hard to measure, it’s best to avoid unnecessary exposure to silver.

Should you try colloidal silver?
Colloidal silver products vary widely in their composition and are usually labeled with false health claims.
To date, no research supports the use of oral colloidal silver in the prevention, treatment, or cure of any health condition or disease. In fact, it’s considered unsafe and ineffective by the FDA.
Further, colloidal silver may lead to unwanted side effects, such as argyria, neurological impairment, and organ damage.
Considering the risks and lack of proven benefits, it’s best to avoid all colloidal silver products.

The bottom line
Colloidal silver is a solution that contains very small pieces of silver. Silver has been used as a traditional medicine for thousands of years.
Today, colloidal silver is used as an alternative medicine to ward off bacteria, fungi, and viruses. Its proponents claim that it treats various diseases, such as cancer, HIV, Lyme disease, and diabetes.
However, no scientific research supports this. In fact, the FDA considers colloidal silver unsafe for human intake due to its harmful effects and buildup in the organs.
Due to its lack of effectiveness and potential side effects, it’s best to avoid colloidal silver.
Not all alternative medicine therapies are unsafe, though the best course of action if you have a serious health condition is to consult your doctor for a treatment regimen.

References:

https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfcfr/CFRSearch.cfm?fr=310.548
https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-1999-08-17/pdf/99-21253.pdf
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/how-to-choose-high-quality-vitamins-and-supplements
https://www.healthline.comhttps://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30781560/
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6315945/
https://www.healthline.com/health/first-aid-with-burns
https://www.healthline.com/health/bacterial-vs-viral-infections
https://www.healthline.comhttps://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30735392/
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/cancer-and-diet
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6756674/
https://www.healthline.com/health/argyria-cure
https://www.healthline.comhttps://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32591303/
https://www.healthline.comhttps://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29026613/
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4544430/
https://www.healthline.comhttps://cfpub.epa.gov/ncea/iris2/chemicalLanding.cfm?substance_nmbr=99
