Title: Cold Brew vs. Other Coffee Drinks: Which Has More Caffeine?

Most cold brews have less caffeine than hot coffees. But caffeine content in a cold brew can vary depending on such factors as brand, bean-to-water ratio, and brewing time.
Cold brew coffee is a type of coffee made by steeping coffee grounds in cold or room temperature water for 8–24 hours.
This results in a caffeinated beverage with a strong, distinct flavor that’s less acidic than regular coffee.
Besides the differences in taste and temperature, cold brew differs from other coffee drinks in its caffeine content.
This article explores how cold brew stacks up against other types of coffee in terms of caffeine content.

How much caffeine is in cold brew?
Most varieties of cold brew use more coffee beans and less water than regular coffee.
On average, a cup of cold brew  coffee  contains around 200 mg of caffeine per 16 ounces (473 mL).
However, the caffeine content can vary quite a bit between different brands.
For example, a 16-ounce (473-mL) cold brew from Starbucks contains 205 mg of caffeine, while a 16-ounce (473-mL) cold brew from Dunkin’ Donuts provides 260 mg of caffeine ( 1 ,  2 ).
Additionally, many factors can influence how much caffeine is in cold brew, including the ( 3 ):
Amount of coffee beans.  Using a higher ratio of coffee beans to water can increase the caffeine content.
Serving size.  Larger coffee drinks contain more caffeine.
Coffee bean type.  Some types of coffee beans contain higher concentrations of caffeine.
Water temperature.  Hot water extracts more  caffeine  from the coffee beans than cold water.
Grind size.  Coffee beans that are more finely ground have a greater total surface area, resulting in a higher amount of caffeine.
Brewing time.  Steeping your coffee beans for a longer time increases the amount of caffeine present in the final product.
As such, the exact amount of caffeine found in cold brew and other coffee drinks may vary.
Cold brew usually contains around 200 mg of caffeine per 16 ounces (473 mL). Yet, several factors influence the caffeine content, including the amount of coffee beans used, serving size, type of bean, water temperature, grind size, and brewing time.

Cold brew vs. other coffee drinks
Even though most varieties of  cold brew  use more coffee beans than hot coffee, cold brew is slightly lower in caffeine.
This is because more caffeine is extracted when coffee is brewed with hot water.
However, cold brew is slightly higher in caffeine than iced coffee. Additionally, a 16-ounce (473-mL) serving of cold brew also contains more caffeine than a 1.5-ounce (44-mL) serving of espresso.
For reference, here’s how much caffeine is found in various coffee drinks at  Starbucks  ( 1 ):
Although cold brew is made using more coffee beans than hot coffee, it may have slightly less caffeine in some cases. However, cold brew generally has more caffeine than iced coffee and espresso.

The bottom line
Cold brew is a type of coffee made by steeping ground coffee beans in cold or room temperature water for 8–24 hours.
It usually contains around 200 mg of caffeine per 16 ounces (473 mL), but the caffeine content can vary based on many factors.
Compared with hot coffee, cold brew may be lower in caffeine, depending on the brand. However, it contains more caffeine than some other types of coffee, including iced coffee and espresso.
Try this today:  You can easily adjust the amount of coffee in your cold brew by switching up the ratio of concentrate and water that you use. Changing the type and grind size of coffee beans is another easy way to customize your cold brew!

References:

https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/top-13-evidence-based-health-benefits-of-coffee
https://www.starbucks.com/menu
https://www.dunkindonuts.com/en/menu/espresso-and-coffee/cold-brew
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5740146/
https://www.healthline.com/health/caffeine-effects-on-body
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/cold-brew-coffee-benefits
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/healthy-starbucks-drinks
https://www.starbucks.com/menu
