Title: Fresh N Lean Review for 2024

The organic prepared meal delivery service didn’t wow our reviewer. Read on to learn more about Fresh N Lean and whether it’s right for you.

Healthline score: 3.8
Ready-to-eat meal delivery services such as Fresh N Lean aim to make mealtime easier by providing nutritious, precooked entrees directly to your door. For health-conscious consumers, Fresh N Lean may be particularly appealing for its commitment to organically sourced ingredients and menus to suit a variety of dietary needs.
While our reviewer didn’t love the taste of the meals, plenty of people do. Read on to learn more about this service.
We scored Fresh N Lean across 10 categories and allotted points from 0–5. The scores below reflect the average rating for each category.
Overall:  3.8
Sign-up, delivery, and cancellation processes:  4
Meal variety:  3.5
Nutrition:  4
Sustainability:  4
Ingredient quality and freshness:  4
Ease of preparation:  5
Taste:  2.5
Affordability:  3
Learn more about  how we test meal kits .

What is Fresh N Lean?
Fresh N Lean was founded in 2010 and is located in Anaheim, California. It has a Better Business Bureau (BBB) rating of A+ and is BBB accredited.
The company specializes in prepared, ready-to-eat, single-serving meals that can be stored in the refrigerator and quickly reheated in the microwave when you want to eat them. For longer storage, you can freeze the meals for up to 8 weeks.
The company stands out from other prepared meal delivery services because it prioritizes higher quality ingredients, including organic produce,  grass-fed beef , free-range poultry, and sustainable seafood. Additionally, everything on the menu is gluten-free.
Fresh N Lean offers the following meal plans:
Protein+:  high protein meals made for performance athletes
Keto:  meals that are less than 15% carbohydrate
Paleo:  meals that contain grass-fed beef, follow  paleo diet  rules, and are less than 22% carbohydrates
Vegan:  plant-based meals that are free from animal products
Vegetarian:  mostly plant-based meals that use eggs and dairy in some preparations
Whole30:  meals that are approved for the Whole30 diet
Mediterranean:  meals that follow  the Mediterranean diet  and are rich in healthy fats and high in fiber
Additionally, you can purchase pure cooked proteins (fish, beef, poultry), vegetables, grains, and snacks under the Bulk plan.
Customers rave about the quality of the food, the value it has added to their lives, and the responsiveness and care of customer service. Most complaints relate to the lack of delivery day options and the small portion sizes.
Meals are delivered weekly, and you can choose to receive either 5 or 7 days’ worth of meals at a time. You can also select the number of meals you want per day.
Here are a few examples of current Fresh N Lean meal options:
Thai Curry Salmon with Coconut Rice and Green Beans
Mediterranean Herb Chicken with Roasted Broccoli and Quinoa
Spicy  Black Bean  Burgers on Whole Wheat Buns with Avocado and Sweet Potato Fries

Pros and cons of Fresh N Lean
seven meal plans to accommodate multiple diets
100% gluten-free meals
grass-fed beef, free-range poultry, and sustainable seafood
breakfast, lunch, dinner, and a la carte choices
free shipping for orders over $100 in the 48 contiguous U.S. states
expensive
minimum order of $85 per week
some customer complaints about small portion sizes
no flexibility in meal delivery days without paying an additional fee
not designed for couples or families


How it works
To sign up for Fresh N Lean, you’ll first need to decide if you want to choose from one of the seven meal plans, or, if you prefer, you can choose the Bulk plan — an a la carte experience that allows you to buy proteins, grains, vegetables, and snacks in bulk, rather than individually portioned meals.
Next, you choose whether you want to receive 5 or 7 days’ worth of meals, and the number of meals you want to receive. You can select any combination of breakfasts, lunches, and dinners. While Fresh N Lean meals are single serving, you can add bulk food options to your order to create meals large enough to serve more than one person.
One thing to note: Fresh N Lean requires that orders must come to at least $85 per week.
The meal selection window is open every Wednesday evening through Friday at midnight Pacific Time. During this window, you can choose the meals you would like from your meal plan, along with any a la carte choices, to be delivered the following week.
If you miss this window, Fresh N Lean receive preselected meals from your preferred plan.
Delivery is available throughout the United States. However, orders must be shipped to a residence and cannot be shipped to P.O. boxes.
Boxes are shipped weekly on Fridays with a guaranteed Saturday delivery. For an additional fee, you can change your delivery day.
You can also choose to skip up to 3 weeks at a time or change your delivery frequency to every 2, 3, or even 4 weeks. You can change your delivery frequency, skip weeks, or cancel your account in the customer dashboard, or by calling customer service.

Fresh N Lean meals
Fresh N Lean delivers 100% gluten-free, individually portioned meals right to your doorstep. Each meal is designed to support a healthy, balanced lifestyle by prioritizing fresh,  organically grown , and whole foods.
According to the company, all of its wild caught seafood is also certified by the  Marine Stewardship Council , and the farm-raised seafood it uses is certified by the  Aquaculture Stewardship Council , an organization that ensures socially and environmentally responsible seafood production and sourcing.
Fresh N Lean meals include a mix of global cuisines, like Thai Red Curry Chicken with Coconut Lime Rice, and traditional favorites, such as Hot Honey BBQ Chicken with Sweet Potato and Spicy Corn Succotash. The menu also includes comfort foods, like Crustless Chicken Pot Pie, and vegetarian options, including Tofu and Mushroom Shawarma.
Fresh N Lean offers meal plans that cater to various diet patterns, including: Protein+ (71% protein), keto, paleo, Mediterranean,  Whole30 , vegan, and vegetarian.
While none of the meal plans are designed specifically for people with conditions such as  diabetes  or kidney disease, there are plenty of meals to choose from that could fit into these specialty diets.
Fresh N Lean accommodates some  food allergies  but not all. When signing up, you can select up to three food allergens to avoid, including sesame, tree nut, and soy. However, because all meals are produced in the same facility, there is a risk of cross contamination.
Fresh N Lean meals are suitable for people who follow a  gluten-free diet . All meals are gluten-free and produced in a gluten-free facility.
Meals are delivered fully prepared and ready to heat and eat in just a few minutes. They come in insulated cardboard boxes with ice packs to ensure proper temperatures.
Place the meals in your refrigerator within 24 hours. According to the company, Fresh N Lean meals should be eaten within 5–7 days. For longer storage, you can freeze them for 6–8 weeks.

How much does Fresh N Lean cost?
Fresh N Lean meals start at $9.99 each, though the final cost depends on the meal plan you select, the number of meals you receive each week, and whether you add snacks or bulk options to your order.
The cost per meal is highest if you order just one meal per day and lowest if you order three meals per day.
Keep in mind that there’s an $85 minimum order requirement, regardless of which and how many items you purchase.
Shipping is $9.99 or free for orders over $100 in the 48 contiguous U.S. states.

We tried it!
Healthline Nutrition Editor  Kelli McGrane , MS, RD, tested Fresh N Lean, sampling a variety of meals from its keto, paleo, vegan, and Mediterranean plans. The meals she tried included:
Spinach and Cauliflower Enchilada with Salsa Verde (Vegan menu)
Cilantro Mint  Salmon  with Turmeric Spiced Cauliflower and Almonds (Paleo menu)
BBQ Chicken Sausage Meatloaf (Mediterranean menu)
Shrimp and Chicken Sausage with Mushrooms (Keto menu)
Romesco  Quinoa  with Tofu and Roasted Kabocha (Vegan menu)
Recipe selection:  McGrane found the Fresh N Lean website intuitive and easy to navigate when choosing meals for certain dietary preferences. However, she thought the number of weekly options were limited compared with other services.
Delivery:  McGrane found the the packaging to be eco-conscious and the meals well-protected and in good condition. “Most  packaging materials  were recyclable or compostable, which I appreciated. The meals themselves were compactly packaged, taking up minimal ‘fridge space,” she said.
Ingredients:  The ingredients in each meal were high quality, and McGrane felt that most of her meals maintained a good texture, noting that her shrimp dish was the outlier, as the shrimp was a bit too rubbery.
Preparation:  When it came to reheating the meals, McGrane noted it was pretty straightforward and easy, with meals ready in just a few minutes.
Taste:  Overall, McGrane found Fresh N Lean flavors to be hit or miss. “The vegan meals required additional seasoning, but the BBQ Chicken Sausage Meatloaf was overly seasoned for my taste,” she said. She found the Cilantro Mint Salmon dish to be well-balanced in flavor, though. “The vegetables were tasty, and the sauce complemented the salmon nicely.”
“Fresh N Lean offers quality and convenience, especially for those following specific dietary patterns. However, in terms of flavor, it might not satisfy all palates equally. As I don’t follow a special dietary pattern, I didn’t like the taste of the meals enough to justify the cost. Plus, there are other prepared meal delivery services that  I’ve tried and enjoyed more .
— Healthline Nutrition Editor Kelli McGrane ,  MS, RD
The verdict:  Despite the high quality ingredients and convenience of the service, McGrane concluded, “While the meals were fresh and textures generally good, the flavors didn’t resonate enough with me to justify the cost. For those not restricted by specific dietary needs, other meal delivery services might offer more enjoyable taste experiences.”

Who should try Fresh N Lean?
Fresh N Lean could be worth trying if you’re following a special diet and don’t want to spend time or energy on  meal planning , shopping, and preparing every meal.
Because the meals are single serving, the service is geared toward single people or those looking for easy lunches to take to work. The quality of the ingredients and the convenience that the service offers may still make it worth trying for some individuals — especially those who don’t mind adding seasonings or condiments.
Fresh N Lean may not be a good fit for families and those on a  budget .

How Fresh N Lean compares
There are several  prepared meal delivery services  designed to support various health and nutrition goals. Here’s a look at how Fresh N Lean stacks up against two others: Factor and Trifecta.

Frequently asked questions
Fresh N Lean can be worth it if you’re seeking convenience, high quality ingredients, and meals tailored to specific dietary needs. However, the flavor profiles might not appeal to everyone, and it’s on the pricier side.
Fresh N Lean can be worth it if you’re seeking convenience, high quality ingredients, and meals tailored to specific dietary needs. However, the flavor profiles might not appeal to everyone, and it’s on the pricier side.
Fresh N Lean offers meal plans like Keto and  Paleo , which can support weight loss when paired with a balanced diet and lifestyle. However, individual results can vary, and it’s best to consult with a healthcare professional for personalized advice.
Fresh N Lean offers meal plans like Keto and  Paleo , which can support weight loss when paired with a balanced diet and lifestyle. However, individual results can vary, and it’s best to consult with a healthcare professional for personalized advice.
Fresh N Lean meals should be consumed within 7–10 days if kept in the refrigerator. For longer storage, meals can be frozen and last for 6–8 weeks.
Fresh N Lean meals should be consumed within 7–10 days if kept in the refrigerator. For longer storage, meals can be frozen and last for 6–8 weeks.
Yes, Fresh N Lean allows easy cancellation. You can skip weeks, change delivery frequency, or cancel your account by contacting the company’s customer service team.
Yes, Fresh N Lean allows easy cancellation. You can skip weeks, change delivery frequency, or cancel your account by contacting the company’s customer service team.

The bottom line
Fresh N Lean provides freshly prepared meals made with high quality ingredients. It offers seven meal plans to choose from, including keto, paleo, vegan, and Mediterranean options.
While it is more expensive than planning and cooking your own meals, Fresh N Lean may be worth the cost if you’re short on time and want help following a special diet.
However, if you’re cooking for a family or looking to brush up on your culinary skills, a  meal kit delivery service , such as Home Chef or HelloFresh, might be a better fit.

References:

https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/how-we-test-meal-kits
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/grass-fed-vs-grain-fed-beef
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/paleo-diet-meal-plan-and-menu
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/mediterranean-diet-meal-plan
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/are-black-beans-healthy
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/what-is-organic-food
https://www.msc.org/en-us
https://www.asc-aqua.org/
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/whole-30
https://www.healthline.com/health/type-2-diabetes/best-meal-plans
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/common-food-allergies
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/gluten-free-diet
https://www.healthline.com/authors/kelli-mcgrane
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/salmon-nutrition-and-health-benefits#1
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/8-health-benefits-quinoa
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/eco-friendly-food-packaging
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/factor-75-vs-freshly
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/meal-prep-tips
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/healthy-meals-on-a-budget
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/best-prepared-meal-delivery-service
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/paleo-diet-meal-plan-and-menu
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/paleo-diet-meal-plan-and-menu
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/best-meal-delivery-service