Title: Instacart Review: Pros, Cons, and Is It Worth the Price?

You may have heard of or used Instacart before, especially now that  grocery delivery  is more popular than ever due to the  COVID-19 pandemic .
The grocery delivery service offers several benefits, the main one being the convenience of having your groceries delivered right to your door. However, the service may also have some downsides.
This article reviews the pros and cons of Instacart, whether it’s worth the price, and how it measures up to other popular grocery delivery services.
available throughout the United States and Canada
optional cost-saving Instacart+ subscription option
same-day delivery available
partners with several large grocery store chains
not available in some rural areas
without Instacart+, delivery fee and service fee apply
Instacart prices may be more expensive than those in-store
some may find the service difficult to use

What is Instacart?
Instacart is a grocery delivery service that employs personal shoppers to shop for you and then deliver the groceries to your home.
It partners with several large grocery store chains and offers same-day delivery in a number of cities.
The service is one of the largest and most widely available in North America, providing service to metro areas in all 50 states, Washington D.C., and all 10 Canadian provinces.
Instacart+ , formerly known as Instacart Express, is an optional subscription service that provides access to unlimited free deliveries on orders over $35 for $99 per year, or $9.99 per month.
It also reduces the service fees on your orders.
If you regularly use grocery delivery services, you may find Instacart+ worthwhile, especially if Instacart is available where you regularly shop.

How much does Instacart cost?
Instacart orders have a delivery fee starting at $3.99, as well as an additional service fee, which is calculated based on your order total and the distance of your delivery. If you order alcohol, Instacart will charge you a separate service fee.
Additionally, certain items may be more expensive through Instacart than at the store. This is common practice for grocery delivery services that partner with multiple stores.
Finally, it’s also customary to tip your shopper for each order, so you should plan for this in your grocery budget.
Instacart+, which costs $99 per year, waives the delivery fee for all orders over $35 and reduces the minimum service fee to 2 percent of your grocery total.
According to Instacart, Instacart+ members save about $7 on each order.
Therefore, if you expect to use Instacart more than 14 times a year, you may save money by joining Instacart+.

How does Instacart work?
Ordering items on Instacart is a relatively straightforward process.
To get started with Instacart, you can sign up and create an account on the website or app using your email, phone number, or Google or Facebook account.
Once you input your address or zip code, you can select from an assortment of stores in your area.
Some examples of stores that are available include:
Target
ALDI
Price Chopper
Costco
Dollar Tree
Walgreens
CVS
Sephora
The Vitamin Shoppe
7-Eleven
You can also filter retailers by categories, such as:
grocery
convenience
ready meals
gifts
alcohol
beauty
bulk
retail
pharmacy
pets
After you’ve chosen a specific store, you can begin browsing through items, which are sorted into categories, such as:
household items
beverages
produce
healthcare
kitchen supplies
The price is displayed, along with other details about the product, such as its ingredients and nutritional information.
To add an item to your cart, simply press the plus button next to each item. You can also easily delete or order more of an item from your shopping cart.
Additionally, you can view the available delivery times for the store you selected, along with the specific price for different time slots throughout the day.
In addition to standard delivery, you can also select a 2-hour or 3-hour delivery slot.
When you’re ready to check out, you can choose a delivery time, add your mobile number, and include specific delivery instructions, if needed.
You can also choose whether you’d like your delivery driver to leave your order at your door for a no-contact delivery.
Next, you’re able to input your payment method, which can be a credit card, debit card, or Electronic Benefit Transfer (EBT) card, if accepted by the specific store.
Once your order has been received, your Instacart shopper will begin picking your items and packing your order.
You can view their progress, send messages, and approve replacements for unavailable items on the Instacart app.
If you want to add any items or make any changes to your order, you can also let them know using the chat feature.
After your order has been packed, your personal shopper will pick it up and begin the delivery process. If there are any issues with finding your address, they will contact you by calling or sending a text message.
Keep in mind that delivery drivers are unable to leave orders unattended unless the customer instructs them to do so. Additionally, you must be available to receive orders containing alcohol or certain high value items that require a certified delivery.
You can report any problems with your order, such as damaged, missing, or incorrect items, directly on the Instacart app or website.
You have up to 14 days to report any issues and will receive either a refund or credit to your account.
You can also cancel or reschedule on the website or app, as well as contact customer service via phone, email, or online chat.

Benefits of Instacart
There are several advantages to Instacart, including the convenience it provides.
Some of the other benefits include:
offers an easy way to get groceries for those otherwise unable to shop in-person, including older adults, people with physical disabilities, and those with limited access to transportation
multiple delivery options available, including same-day delivery and scheduled deliveries up to 2 weeks in advance
has a dedicated customer service line just for order assistance for older adults
provides a safe, physically distanced grocery shopping experience
widely available, with grocery delivery in all 50 states, Washington D.C., and all Canadian provinces
offers optional Instacart+ membership, which can save members an average of $7 per grocery order

Potential downsides of Instacart
Although there are many benefits of using Instacart, there are a few downsides to consider as well:
currently unavailable in many rural areas, which may be due to a lack of grocery stores or Instacart shoppers
may be more expensive than in-store shopping due to higher priced items and delivery and service fees
could be difficult to use for those who have limited experience using technology or lack access to the internet or a smartphone

Who is Instacart for?
Instacart is a good option for people who don’t mind spending extra money to save time on grocery shopping.
It may also be worth considering for people who have difficulty shopping in-store, including older adults, people with physical disabilities, or people with limited access to transportation.
Instacart can also help streamline your weekly shopping list, making it easier to plan out your meals or stick to your food budget.
Because Instacart offers a wide range of products from a variety of retailers, it can also be a convenient way to stock up on other items, including:
pet supplies
cosmetics
electronics
Additionally, Instacart’s new gift feature allows you to order a selection of gifts for pick-up or same-day delivery, making it a great choice for special occasions and last-minute gifts.

Customer reviews and brand reputation
Instacart has been named in several lawsuits in recent years involving issues with:
its tipping policy
the alleged misclassification of shoppers as independent contractors
charging “deceptive” service fees to customers
Instacart is not currently accredited by the  Better Business Bureau (BBB) , but it holds an A+ rating. This rating is based on factors like the company’s complaint history and business practices.
At the time of publication, Instacart also has an average customer rating of 1.08 out of 5 stars on the BBB website, which is based on more than 1,000 reviews.
Similarly, on  Trustpilot , Instacart has over 6,500 customer reviews and an average rating of 1.3 out of 5 stars.
Many reviewers note experiencing issues with unauthorized charges, missing items or orders, and late deliveries.
Some customers also report feeling dissatisfied with customer service and unexpected or unexplained order cancellations.
On the other hand, more favorable reviews state that the service can be a simple, time-saving, and convenient alternative to in-store shopping.

How does Instacart compare with other grocery delivery services?
This table compares Instacart with three other popular grocery delivery services: Walmart Delivery, Shipt, and Amazon Fresh.

Is Instacart worth trying?
If Instacart is available in your area, it’s a solid choice for grocery delivery, especially if the stores you regularly shop at participate in the service.
If you only use grocery delivery occasionally, the regular Instacart service should be sufficient for your needs.
However, expect to pay at least $10–15 more than you would at the store after factoring in delivery and service fees, higher prices, and a tip for the delivery person.
If you think you’ll order grocery delivery more than 14 times a year, it’s worth paying for the annual Instacart+ membership for free delivery and a reduced service fee.
Make sure that all of your orders are over $35 to qualify for free delivery.

Frequently asked questions about Instacart
Instacart offers several delivery options and can be a convenient, contact-free alternative to grocery shopping. It’s also widely available and has partnered with a variety of stores to provide a wide range of products.
On the other hand, it can be expensive and isn’t available in all areas. It may also be challenging to use for people who aren’t as tech-savvy or have limited access to the internet.
Instacart holds an A+ rating from the BBB and is generally considered a trustworthy company. However, while many people use Instacart without any issues, some customers report issues with late deliveries, missing items, or incorrect orders.
Instacart scams are uncommon, though some customers report issues like missing items or deliveries. For this reason, it’s best to double-check your order once you receive it and be sure to report any problems to customer service.
Instacart shoppers are issued a debit card from Instacart, which can be used to cover the cost of groceries when fulfilling orders for customers.

The bottom line
Instacart is a grocery delivery service operating in most metro areas in the United States and Canada. It offers delivery from many large grocery chains, as well as smaller local grocery stores.
Instacart+ is a subscription option that waives delivery fees and lowers service fees, and it’s best for people who order grocery delivery regularly.
If you’re interested in grocery delivery and live in an urban or suburban area, Instacart is a promising option that’s probably available where you live.

References:
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/best-grocery-delivery
https://www.healthline.com/coronavirus
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/instacart-express-review
https://www.bbb.org/us/ca/san-francisco/profile/food-delivery/instacartcom-1116-444065
https://www.trustpilot.com/review/instacart.com
