Title: Metabolic Renewal Review: Pros, Cons, and Effectiveness


Healthline diet score: 2.83 out of 5
Metabolic Renewal is a weight loss program designed specifically for women.
The program aims to boost your metabolism by modifying your diet and exercise routine based on your specific hormone type. Yet, the science behind these claims is suspect.
Despite several downsides, it has become popular among those looking to enhance their energy levels, curb cravings, and promote overall health.
This article examines the pros and cons of Metabolic Renewal to determine whether you should give it a try.
Overall score:  2.83
Weight loss:  3.5
Healthy eating:  3
Sustainability:  2.5
Whole body health:  2.5
Nutrition quality:  3.5
Evidence-based:  2
BOTTOM LINE: While Metabolic Renewal may promote short-term weight loss, many aspects of the plan aren’t backed by evidence. Additionally, it’s difficult to sustain long term and may lead to weight regain once you resume a normal diet.

What is Metabolic Renewal?
Metabolic Renewal was designed by Jade Teta, a naturopathic doctor who specializes in natural health and fitness. The program is intended to optimize women’s metabolism using Teta’s “4 M” framework — Mindset, Movement, Meals, and Metabolics.
The idea that seven distinct hormone types exist is central to the program, as well as that determining your specific hormone type may enhance your metabolism.
Metabolic Renewal offers a 12-week meal plan with recipes tailored to your hormone type.
It also includes access to a collection of 15-minute workouts, along with guidebooks on balancing hormone levels and eliminating  belly fat .
Metabolic Renewal offers two versions of the program.
The first is the online version that allows you to download or stream the workouts on your computer, smartphone, or tablet.
The second option includes online access, along with DVDs and printed materials, for $97, plus the cost of shipping and handling.

How much does it cost?
Metabolic Renewal costs $97 regardless of whether you opt for the online version or prefer DVDs and printed materials, though the latter version has an additional fee for shipping and handling.
Both programs are discounted on the company’s website and include a 90-day money-back guarantee if you’re not satisfied.
There are also optional add-ons you can order at checkout, including an audiobook and several supplements.

Pros and cons at a glance
may support short-term weight loss
simple, flexible, and easy to follow
offers options for several diet patterns
not evidence-based
designed to be followed for only 12 weeks, which may lead to weight regain
relatively expensive compared to other diet plans
some reports of issues with unauthorized  charges and refunds

How to follow it
The first step of Metabolic Renewal is to determine your hormone type using an online quiz, which collects information about your age,  menstrual cycle , medical history, and health goals.
A guide called “The Hormone-Balancing Roadmap” provides detailed information on how to follow the plan, depending on your hormone type.
Meal plans are based on what Teta calls the 3-2-1 Diet, which provides three meals per day, two of which contain only protein and vegetables and one of which includes a small portion of  starch .
The program includes a detailed meal plan with recipes, but you’re permitted to create your own meals based on the 3-2-1 Diet’s principles, adding  snacks  as needed.
Metabolic Renewal also includes a 12-week workout plan that’s divided into 4 phases. Throughout the program, you’re required to exercise for 15 minutes 3 times per week using the plan’s Intelligent Workouts, which claim to combine resistance and cardio training.
On your days off, you’re encouraged to walk for a set amount of time that’s determined by your hormone type. Doing so is said to help maintain any changes to your metabolism.
Furthermore, Metabolic Renewal offers a private online community for its customers.
For a one-time fee, customers can purchase an online version of the program or a collection of DVDs and printed materials, which includes all the resources needed to get started.

Foods to eat and avoid
Metabolic Renewal doesn’t eliminate any foods outright but encourages a low carb, high protein diet. Fruits, grains, fats, and oils can all be enjoyed in moderation.
Fruits (in moderation):  apples, oranges, kiwi, melons, berries, peaches, and plums
Vegetables:  broccoli, cauliflower, kale, spinach, tomatoes, and carrots
Meat:  beef, lamb, and pork
Fish:  salmon , codfish, mackerel, sardines, and halibut
Poultry:  chicken, turkey, goose, and duck
Grains (in moderation):  quinoa, couscous, rice, oats, and buckwheat
Fats and oils (in moderation):  olive oil, butter,  ghee , coconut oil, and avocados
Beverages:  water, black coffee, and unsweetened tea
Herbs and spices:  turmeric, cinnamon, black pepper, cumin, and garlic
While no foods are banned, you should limit processed foods and items high in carbs and sugar.
Processed foods:  fast food, frozen meals, breakfast cereal,  granola bars , and microwave popcorn
Sweets:  cake, cookies, candy, and baked goods
Salty snacks:  crackers, pretzels, and potato chips
Sugar-sweetened beverages:  soda , sweet tea, sports drinks, and energy drinks
Added sugars:  honey, table sugar, maple syrup, and brown sugar

Customer reviews and brand reputation
Metabolic Renewal’s parent company,  Natural Health Sherpa , is accredited by the Better Business Bureau (BBB) and currently holds an “A” rating, which is based on factors like the company’s complaint history and business practices.
While Natural Health Sherpa has been involved in several lawsuits in the past, there are no lawsuits mentioning Metabolic Renewal specifically.
Still, Metabolic Renewal failed Healthline’s vetting process because the company makes many unsupported health claims and doesn’t provide any details on the research or studies that are referenced on the program’s website.
There are also several concerns about the safety and effectiveness of the program, especially given that there is little evidence to support it.
At the time of publication, Metabolic Renewal has a rating of 2.9 out of 5 stars on its Facebook page, based on 114 customer reviews.
Many customers note that they were charged for supplements and products they didn’t order and that they’ve had difficulty receiving refunds or contacting customer service.
On the other hand, some positive reviews report experiencing success with the program and note that the workouts are easy, fast, and effective.

Potential benefits of Metabolic Renewal
Although Metabolic Renewal hasn’t been studied specifically, it may offer several health benefits.
Several aspects of the program may aid short-term weight loss.
For starters, Metabolic Renewal encourages a diet rich in  unprocessed whole foods , including meat, fish, poultry, and vegetables.
These foods are not only often lower in calories than processed foods but also rich in important nutrients like vitamins, minerals, and antioxidants.
Additionally, some research links a lower intake of processed foods to a decreased risk of obesity ( 1 ).
Metabolic Renewal is also low in carbs, with most meals consisting of vegetables and a source of protein. Some studies show that  low carb diets  promote short-term weight loss and fat loss ( 2 ,  3 ).
What’s more, increasing your protein intake may keep you feeling full for longer, which likewise supports weight loss ( 4 ).
Metabolic Renewal doesn’t require you to  count calories , measure your food, or track macronutrients. It also offers several ways to customize your meal plan, making it a good fit for those who prefer more flexibility.
In fact, you can easily swap in other recipes from the meal plan or create your own meals using the basic principles of the diet.
Plus, it offers options for paleo,  keto , vegan, and vegetarian diets.

Downsides
Although Metabolic Renewal may offer some benefits, there’s no evidence to support many aspects of the plan.
The idea that there are seven specific female hormone types isn’t backed by science.
In fact, most of the benefits of this program are likely due to its recommended dietary and lifestyle changes — not optimizing female metabolism.
Keep in mind that Metabolic Renewal is a short-term program designed to be followed for 12 weeks.
Although many short-term diets lead to rapid weight loss, you’re likely to  regain weight  after you resume a normal diet. That’s partly because brief dietary changes don’t often translate to long-term lifestyle habits ( 5 ).

Sample 3-day menu
Metabolic Renewal provides a 12-week meal plan, although you can still create your own meals using the basic principles of the diet.
Here’s a sample 3-day meal plan for Metabolic Renewal.
Breakfast:  a smoothie with protein powder, banana,  flax seeds , and spinach
Lunch:  a salad with grilled chicken, lettuce, tomatoes, and carrots
Dinner:  garlic pork chops with  couscous  and asparagus
Snack:  hard-boiled eggs
Breakfast:  a smoothie with protein powder, apple, chia seeds, and kale
Lunch:  cauliflower rice  with stir-fried veggies and beef
Dinner:  baked salmon with broccoli and quinoa
Snack:  sliced cucumbers with  hummus
Breakfast:  a smoothie with protein powder, berries, hemp seeds, and  beets
Lunch:  a chopped salad with turkey, red cabbage, bell peppers, cucumbers, and tomatoes
Dinner:  grilled mackerel with sweet potato wedges and sautéed  kale
Snacks:  peanut butter with celery

Alternatives to Metabolic Renewal
Whether you’re looking to lose weight, balance your hormone levels, or improve your health, there are several alternatives to Metabolic Renewal to consider, including:
WW.  Formerly known as  Weight Watchers , WW is a weight loss program that assigns foods a points value and gives members a PersonalPoints budget to fit their needs. Members can opt for one-on-one coaching or group workshops for extra support.
Noom.  This  app-based program  aims to help you build healthier habits to support weight loss and health. Foods and drinks are categorized as green, yellow, or red based on their calorie density. Members are also assigned a virtual support team and can easily connect with other members of the community.
Mayo Clinic Diet.  Designed to promote long lasting, sustainable weight loss, the Mayo Clinic Diet is a digital program that provides meal plans, at-home workouts, and an online food log to help you stay on track.
Here is a closer look at how these programs compare:

The bottom line
Metabolic Renewal is a program intended to optimize women’s metabolism by making changes to their diet and exercise routine.
Although the diet is very flexible and may lead to short-term  weight loss , many aspects are rooted in unfounded health claims.
Furthermore, its short-term nature makes weight regain likely once you resume a normal diet.

Frequently asked questions
Although some of the diet and lifestyle changes the program promotes may lead to weight loss, there is no evidence to support the idea that the program can balance your  metabolism .
Metabolic Renewal is a short-term program designed to be followed for 12 weeks. However, according to the creator, you can also repeat it several times until you reach your goals.
While Metabolic Renewal does not currently offer a free trial, the program’s website offers discounted rates and a 90-day money-back guarantee.
Metabolic Renewal might be useful for people who prefer a more structured diet and exercise plan to help them stay on track. However, many other available diet options are more affordable and can support long-term weight loss.

References:

https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/20-tips-to-lose-belly-fat
https://www.healthline.com/health/womens-health/yeast-infection-before-period
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/high-starch-foods
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/snacking-good-or-bad
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/11-benefits-of-salmon
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/ghee
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/are-granola-bars-healthy
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/13-ways-sugary-soda-is-bad-for-you
https://www.bbb.org/us/nc/wilmington/profile/health-and-wellness/natural-health-sherpa-0693-90031250
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/21-reasons-to-eat-real-food
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5787353/
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/why-do-low-carb-diets-work
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6368026/
https://www.healthline.comhttps://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25527677/
https://www.healthline.comhttps://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25926512/
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/5-best-calorie-counters
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/ketogenic-diet-101
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/do-diets-make-you-gain-weight
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5764193/
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/benefits-of-flaxseeds
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/couscous-benefits
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/cauliflower-rice-calories
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/is-hummus-healthy
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/benefits-of-beets
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/10-proven-benefits-of-kale
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/weight-watchers-diet-review
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/noom-diet-review
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/how-to-lose-weight-as-fast-as-possible
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/10-ways-to-boost-metabolism
