Title: Shipt Review: Everything You Need to Know

Shipt is a popular delivery service that makes it easy to get groceries and other products delivered directly to your door.
Like other services, Shipt offers flat-fee delivery as well as an annual membership that includes unlimited delivery on orders over $35.
However, while Shipt may be a quick and convenient alternative to grocery shopping for many, it may not be a good fit for everyone.
This article takes a closer look at Shipt, including how it works and who should give it a try.

What is Shipt?
Shipt is a delivery service that allows you to order products from your favorite stores in your area, including local and national retailers.
In addition to grocery delivery, Shipt offers delivery from a variety of other retail stores, allowing you to order everything from pet supplies to home goods, medications, and  baby products .
After you purchase products from a retailer using the app or website, Shipt matches you with a shopper, who packs and delivers your order directly to your door.
You can also add detailed instructions for your shopper during checkout, including delivery instructions and substitution preferences in case an item is out of stock.
Additionally, Shipt provides many options for receiving your order, including self-pickup and scheduled or same-day deliveries.

Store selection
The selection of products available through Shipt mostly depends on your location and which stores are in your area.
Some of the most popular stores that offer delivery through Shipt are:
Target
CVS Pharmacy
Petco
Costco
Meijer
H-E-B
Office Depot
Bed Bath & Beyond
Once you select a store, you can select almost any product on the retailer’s website.
You can also choose whether you would like to receive substitutions for items that are unavailable and whether the shopper should choose suitable substitutions on their own or if you would prefer them to contact you instead.
If you’re unable to find what you need on the website, you can add a special request for your shopper with a detailed description of what you’re looking for.

Diet-friendliness
Shipt allows you to purchase a wide array of products from many retailers, making it easy to find options to fit any food preferences or dietary restrictions.
For example, Target offers an extensive selection of fruits, vegetables,  frozen meals , and dairy products, along with many types of meat, fish, and poultry.
This makes it possible to find foods that work for you, regardless of whether you’re following a vegetarian, paleo, or  ketogenic diet .
The nutritional information and ingredient list are also available for each product. This can be especially useful for those with food allergies or sensitivities.

Pros and cons of Shipt
There are several pros and cons to consider when deciding whether Shipt is right for you.
Wide selection of products available.  Whether you’re looking for specific brands or  organic  ingredients, it’s easy to find a variety of options that can be delivered through Shipt.
Easy to use.  Retailers offer detailed information about ingredients and allow you to filter products by category, price, and brand.
Convenient delivery.  Many delivery options are available, including same-day and scheduled deliveries.
Quality can vary.  Certain foods, such as packaged items, are more likely to arrive in good condition, whereas fresh fruits and vegetables may be subject to more variability.
Uses plastic packaging.  Though there’s an option to request paper bags instead of plastic, this may not be available at all stores. This may be an important consideration for consumers who prefer reusable or paper bags to  reduce their use of plastic .
Limited options for some customers.  The selection of retailers and products may be limited in certain locations, and pickup is not always available.
Price.  In addition to the delivery and service fees, products purchased on Shipt also cost slightly more than those purchased in-store.

How much does Shipt cost?
Shipt offers several options for delivery, which vary in price.
You can opt for a single delivery when checking out, which costs $10. A delivery fee and service fee also apply for one-time orders and are displayed at checkout.
Any orders that contain alcohol are also subject to a $7 alcohol fee.
More frequent shoppers may want to consider a Shipt membership, as it’s the most cost-effective delivery option.
Shipt Everyday costs $99 per year or $10.99 per month and includes free delivery on all orders over $35. For deliveries under $35, a $7 fee and any applicable service fees apply.
When checking out, you can also add an optional tip for your Shipt shopper. You can adjust the tip after delivery and add an extra tip at any time.

How to use Shipt
Here’s a closer look at how Shipt works.
To get started with Shipt, you can either visit the service’s website or download the Shipt app on your mobile device.
You can continue as a guest or create an account, which requires basic information like your name and email address.
After you’ve signed up on the website or app, Shipt will display a list of stores that are available for delivery based on your location.
You can browse through the available retailers near you and select a store to start shopping.
On the app, the estimated delivery times for each store are displayed at the top of the screen under the search bar.
Items are sorted into categories such as pantry staples, produce, frozen foods, and personal care. You can also search for specific items or brands.
You can easily add items to your cart by tapping the plus icon and adjust the quantity as needed. To view the items in your cart, simply click on the cart icon in the upper right-hand corner.
Once you’re ready to check out, click the cart icon and review your order carefully.
Next, you’ll be prompted to select an available 1-hour delivery window. Depending on the specific retailer, you may be able to opt for same-day delivery or schedule your delivery within the next few days.
On the checkout screen, you can input your payment information, as well as other details such as your phone number, delivery address, and any delivery instructions.
You can also choose from the following three options for substitution instructions:
Contact me so I can choose.
Choose for me.
Do not substitute.
Additionally, you can determine whether you’d like your shopper to leave your order at the door and whether you’d like to add a tip, which can be adjusted up to 2 hours after delivery or added later.

Customer reviews and brand reputation
Shipt is accredited by the  Better Business Bureau  and holds an A+ rating at the time of publication.
On  Trustpilot , Shipt has a 4.3 rating, which is based on 7,456 customer reviews.
Positive reviews note that the service can be a convenient, efficient, easy, and reliable alternative to grocery shopping at the store.
On the other hand, less favorable reviews report issues with damaged products, late deliveries, and missing items. Some customers also state that communication and customer service can be inconsistent and depend mostly on the specific shopper you’re matched with.
Many negative reviews published online come from Shipt shoppers, who report issues with the app, rating system, and pay scale the company uses.
Shipt has been involved in two lawsuits with shoppers working for the company, including a recent lawsuit involving the misclassification of workers as independent contractors ( 1 ).
Another pending 2021 lawsuit involves a driver for Shipt seeking reimbursement for losses incurred from a motor vehicle accident while working ( 2 ).

Shipt vs. competitors
Several other  grocery delivery services  have similarities to Shipt.
For instance, Amazon Fresh allows you to purchase groceries for delivery in select areas. Though this service may be a good option for some people, the product selection may be more limited, as it doesn’t allow you to order items from other retailers.
Walmart+ (formerly known as Walmart Grocery) also offers convenient curbside pickup and delivery. However, this service is limited to Walmart products, and delivery isn’t available in all areas.
Instacart is Shipt’s closest competitor. While the two services are similar in terms of membership fees and product selection, Instacart is available in more locations throughout the United States and may be a better choice for people in smaller cities.

Who should try Shipt
Shipt is a good option for those who prefer the convenience and ease of ordering groceries online.
Its monthly and annual memberships are also ideal for people who frequently order groceries or other products and prefer to avoid paying a delivery fee with each purchase.
However, delivery options may be limited, depending on your location.
Additionally, pickup isn’t currently available at all stores or locations, which may be inconvenient for some people.

Frequently asked questions
Shipt offers annual and monthly memberships at prices similar to many of its competitors, including Instacart. However, its monthly fee is slightly lower than those of other services, such as Walmart+ and Amazon Fresh.
Shipt and Instacart have several similarities and offer memberships at a comparable price point. However, Instacart is currently available in more areas of the country than Shipt.
Shipt may be worth the price if you’re looking for a convenient and time-saving way to order groceries.
It may also be worth considering if you have limited access to transportation or have other physical or functional limitations that can make shopping in person challenging.

The bottom line
Shipt is a delivery service that allows you to order a variety of foods and products from retailers.
Not only does it boast an extensive selection of ingredients to choose from, but it’s also a convenient and easy way to get your groceries delivered.
Shipt may be a good choice for people who frequently order products online and enjoy the ease of having their groceries delivered each week.

References:

https://www.healthline.com/health/parenting/how-much-does-it-cost-to-raise-a-baby-and-what-you-can-do-to-prepare
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/frozen-meal-delivery
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/ketogenic-diet-101
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/what-is-organic-food
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/how-to-reduce-carbon-footprint
https://www.bbb.org/us/al/birmingham/profile/grocery-delivery/shipt-0463-90146509
https://www.trustpilot.com/review/shipt.com
https://www.healthline.comhttps://casetext.com/case/green-v-shipt-inc
https://www.healthline.comhttps://unicourt.com/case/pc-db5-valencia-v-shipt-inc-963032
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/best-grocery-delivery
