Title: The 11 Best Air Fryer Ovens


A quick look at the best air fryer ovens
Best overall:   Breville Smart Oven Air Fryer Pro
Best products from a top brand:   Ninja Foodi 8-in-1 Digital Air Fryer ,  Ninja Foodi 10-in-1 XL Pro Air Fry Digital Countertop Convection Toaster Oven
Best countertop convection ovens:  Calphalon Performance Air Fry Convection Oven ,  Nuwave Bravo XL Convection Oven ,  Cuisinart Convection Toaster Oven Air Fryer
Best large capacity:   Kalorik 26 Quart Digital Maxx Air Fryer Oven
Best budget:  Black and Decker Extra Wide Crisp ‘n Bake Air Fry Toaster Oven
Best for families:  Instant Vortex Plus Air Fryer Oven 7-in-1 with Rotisserie
Best for one person:   Hamilton Beach Sure-Crisp Air Fryer Toaster Oven
Best high end:   Brava
Air fryers are trendy kitchen appliances that cook and crisp a variety of foods with little or no oil — and hence without the extra calories and fat normally associated with  fried foods .
A specific type called an air fryer oven typically offers a larger capacity than traditional air fryers while taking up less counter space. These multifunctional appliances offer baking, broiling, toasting, dehydrating, and rotisserie options in addition to air frying.

Healthline Reviews: How do Air Fryers Work?

How we chose the best air fryer ovens
To create this list of the best air fryer ovens, here’s what we considered:
Capacity.  How much food can it cook?
Features.  Does it have any other functionality besides air frying?
Accessories.  What accessories are included?
Reviews.  Does it have high customer ratings?
All products on our list have been vetted to ensure that they align with Healthline’s brand integrity standards and approach to well-being. You can read more about  our vetting process .
Here are the 11 best air fryer ovens of 2022.
General price ranges with dollar signs ($ to $$$) are indicated below. One dollar sign means the product is rather affordable, whereas three dollar signs indicate a higher cost.
Generally, prices range from $80–$1,095, though this may vary depending on where you shop.
Pricing guide
$  = under $100
$$  = $100–$300
$$$  = over $300

Healthline’s picks of the best air fryer ovens
Price:  $$$
This  air fryer  oven from high-end kitchen appliance brand Breville is widely recommended.
While it’s expensive, reviewers note you get what you pay for as it works well and offers several additional functions, including:
toast
pizza
proof
cookies
slow cook
It also fits a decent amount of food as there’s room for four racks, a 14-pound (6-kg) turkey or a 9 × 13 inch (23 × 33 cm) casserole dish.
Plus, the smart oven features sensors to direct heating and prevent uneven cooking.
Capacity:  up to 4 levels (can fit 9 slices of bread, a 14-pound (6-kg) turkey, or a 9-inch (23-cm) by 13-inch (33-cm) pan)
Additional functions:  toast, bagel, broil, bake, roast, warm, pizza, proof, reheat, cookies, slow cook, dehydrate
Key features:
built-in sensors direct heating to prevent uneven cooking
can hold up to 4 trays at once
Considerations:
needs plenty of counter space
one reviewer reported glass busting while in use
Ninja Foodi is a renowned brand of countertop appliances. In addition to air fryers, the company makes pressure cookers, electric grills, and  blenders . Ninja Foodi products feature middle-of-the-road prices and a wide variety of features.
Price:  $$$
Although this air fryer only has space to cook on one rack at a time, it fits a standard-sized baking sheet — giving it generous cooking capacity.
It can also be stored upright to preserve counter space when not in use.
In addition to air frying, this digital appliance can also broil, bake, toast, keep warm, and dehydrate. There’s even a bagel setting to help you make the perfect breakfast sandwich.
Capacity:  1 level (fits a 13-inch (33-cm) pizza, 9 slices of toast, or 6 chicken breasts)
Additional functions:  air roast, air broil, bake, toast, bagel, dehydrate, keep warm
Key features:
can be stored upright to save counter space
preheats in 60 seconds
Considerations:
can fit only one rack at a time
reviewers say the interior is very difficult to clean
Price:  $$$
If you want an air fryer that can cook a whole roast or chicken along with sides, the Ninja Foodie 10-in-1 is a good option.
In fact, the unit can accommodate full meals and even provides two cooking racks.
Ninja also sells an upgraded version of this oven that contains a built-in thermometer, which tells you when your food is fully cooked to a  safe internal temperature .
Capacity:  2 levels (can fit a 5-pound (2-kg) chicken and vegetables on a sheet pan, two 12-inch (30-cm) pizzas, or a 12-pound (5-kg) turkey)
Additional functions:  air roast, bake, whole roast, broil, toast, bagel, dehydrate, reheat, pizza
Key features:
optional built-in thermometer upgrade available
can cook on two levels at once
Considerations:
some reviewers note that it’s too loud
reviewers say that it’s difficult to clean
Most air fryer ovens are convection-powered toaster ovens, meaning that fans circulate the heat evenly throughout the cooking chamber. This allows the food to cook more quickly and evenly than it does in a traditional oven.
These straightforward, toaster-oven-style air fryers use convection heat to evenly cook and crisp food on all sides.
Price:  $$
Calphalon, a trusted cookware brand, offers a highly rated air fryer convection oven that boasts a “turbo convection” feature for increased air circulation and a faster cooking time.
It also offers 2 levels and can cook a large whole chicken.
While the reviews are overall positive, some customers complain that the bake option doesn’t work as well as a traditional oven.
Capacity:  2 levels (can fit a 12-inch (30-cm) pizza or a large whole chicken)
Additional functions:  bake, toast, broil, roast, bagel, dehydrate, pizza, reheat, keep warm, defrost
Key features:
modern, dark stainless steel appearance
several functions in one appliance
Considerations:
per reviewers, heat from the oven may damage electronic components
exterior gets extremely hot to the touch
Price:  $$
Although it has room for only one rack at a time, the Nuwave Bravo XL boasts a fairly large capacity.
Plus, the oven comes with a built-in temperature probe to help ensure that your food is fully cooked.
The Bravo XL also has a variety of functions, including a yogurt-making setting. My colleague, Laura Flynn Endres of  Get Fit Done , says that the Nuwave Bravo has earned its counter space in her kitchen because of all the different functions it offers in addition to air frying.
Capacity:  2 levels (can hold a 13-inch (33-cm) pizza, 10 pounds (4.5 kg) of chicken, or 8 slices of toast)
Additional functions:  bake, broil, dehydrate, frozen, grill, pizza, reheat, roast, slow roast, toast, yogurt
Key features:
comes with a built-in temperature probe
grill plate allows the oven to be used as an indoor grill
Considerations:
one reviewer reports glass shattered during use
controls are difficult to use
Price:  $$
Despite being more compact than others on this list, the Cuisinart Convection Toaster Oven Air Fryer can still cook up to two racks of food at once.
You can also choose between conventional bake and broil or convection-powered bake and broil.
Additionally, it comes with a spray bottle for  oil  so that you can easily add the small amount you need for air frying.
Just keep in mind that several reviewers note that the oven runs hot, so you’ll want to keep a close eye on your food to keep it from burning.
Capacity:  2 levels (can air fry up to 3 pounds (1.4 kg) of food, toast 6 slices of bread, bake a 4-pound (1.8-kg) chicken, or cook a 12-inch (30-cm) pizza)
Additional functions:  convection bake, convection broil, bake, broil, warm, toast
Key features:
ability to choose convection or conventional baking or broiling
includes spray bottle for oil
Considerations:
runs hot and burns food easily, according to several reviewers
some reviewers report that their unit dies right at 1 year
Price:  $$
If you’re cooking for a larger household, you may need a high-capacity air fryer.
This Kalorik air fryer oven boasts an extra-large capacity, fitting up to three racks or a large chicken with sides.
It comes with several accessories and can replace multiple appliances.
As some customers have complained of uneven cooking, you’ll want to keep an eye on your food and consider turning it halfway through.
Capacity:  up to 3 levels (can fit a whole chicken, a 12-inch (30-cm) pizza, or 9 slices of toast)
Additional functions:  bake, grill, toast, rotisserie, pizza, roast, broil, warm, dehydrate
Key features:
maximum temperature of 500°F (260°C)
comes with several accessories and a cookbook
Considerations:
reviewers say the heat from the unit can melt or burn plastic on the door
some customers complain of uneven cooking and inaccurate temperature readings
Price:  $
This no-frills air fryer toaster oven costs under $100, yet it boasts a fairly large capacity for its low price.
Although it doesn’t have as many features as others, its affordability and large capacity make it a promising option.
Be sure to read the reviews before you purchase it, as some customers wish that the insulation was better, while others note that the drip pan is too small.
Capacity:  2 levels (can fit a 9-inch (23-cm) by 13-inch (33-cm) pan, 8 slices of bread, or a 12-inch (30-cm) pizza)
Additional functions:  bake, broil, toast, keep warm
Key features:
large capacity for the price
easy-to-use manual knob controls
Considerations:
some reviews complain about poorly insulated with thin walls
drip pan is smaller than the fry basket
Price:  $$
This easy-to-use, easy-to-clean air fryer oven from the makers of the Instant Pot is a great choice for families. You can cook on up to two racks at once or cook a chicken rotisserie-style.
You can also use the rotating rotisserie basket to air fry items like  french fries , ensuring that all sides are evenly cooked and crisp.
Unfortunately, this air fryer oven doesn’t seem to be as well constructed as the popular Instant Pot, as several reviewers have reported quality-control issues.
Capacity:  10 quarts with 2 levels (can fit an 8-inch (20.3-cm) pizza, 2 pounds (0.9 kg) of fries, or 4 pounds (1.8 kg) of chicken)
Additional functions:  bake, roast, toast, broil, dehydrate, rotisserie
Key features:
compact size with 2 cooking levels
short preheat time
Considerations:
smaller capacity than others on this list
some customers complain that the oven melts and burns plastic components on the rotisserie accessories
Price:  $
If you’re cooking for one, you probably don’t need a huge air fryer oven that takes up valuable counter space.
This inexpensive model from Hamilton Beach is the perfect size for an individual, as it can fit a 9-inch (23-cm)  pizza  or a 3-pound (1.4-kg) chicken.
It also includes an air fry basket, baking pan, and broil rack, so you’ll have all the accessories you need to start cooking.
Capacity:  1 level (can fit an 8-inch (20-cm) by 8-inch (20-cm) pan, 4 slices of toast, a 9-inch (23-cm) pizza, or a 3-pound (1.4-kg) chicken)
Additional functions:  toast, bake, broil
Key features:
doesn’t take up much counter space
inexpensive and ideal for solo meals
Considerations:
air-fried foods could be crispier, according to reviewers
some customers complain about uneven cooking
Price:  $$$
Brava, while pricey, is a high-end countertop appliance that can replace an air fryer and several other appliances.
Using light as its heat source, it requires no preheat time and can reach a temperature of 500 ° F (260 ° C) in just 1 second, according to the company’s website.
Brava not only cooks twice as fast as convection ovens but also offers several preprogrammed recipes that will cycle through different settings on the machine to ensure that each component of your meal is fully and perfectly cooked.
Capacity:  2 levels (can fit 9-inch (23-cm) by 12-inch (33-cm) baking sheets)
Additional functions:  cook, sear, bake, toast, reheat, air fry, dehydrate, slow cook, custom
Key features:
no preheat time required
uses 6 high-powered lamps for even and consistent cooking
Considerations:
expensive
learning curve to become familiar with presets and custom settings

Comparison chart

How to choose the best air fryer oven
Choosing the best air fryer oven comes down to four main factors.
Those cooking for larger households or who want to cook multiple foods at once should consider one of the larger options, such as the Kalorik oven.
Because it can be difficult to tell how large the cooking area is for a given air fryer oven just from looking at photos, you may want to check the website, Amazon page, or product reviews. See how many racks can be used to cook at once, how large a chicken or turkey will fit in the oven, or how many slices of bread can fit on the rack.
These can all help you determine if an air fryer oven would be an appropriate size for your family.
Keep in mind that most air fryer ovens on this list range in price from $100–$300. If you’re looking to spend toward the lower end of that range, your options may be limited.
You’ll also want to consider additional features. Many products are large enough to cook whole chickens  rotisserie-style  and come with the accessories to do so. Likewise, many have a temperature setting low enough to use them as a dehydrator.
Finally, be sure to check the reviews. If you see patterns in the negative reviews, this is something you’ll want to take notice of — especially if they’re about safety.

Frequently asked questions about air fryer ovens
Air fryer ovens work by using fans to circulate hot air (typically from a heat lamp inside of the unit) rapidly through a small area, cooking food and allowing it to get crispy.
This allows you to achieve a texture and crispiness similar to frying, without using as much oil.
Yes, air fryer ovens are sanitary and safe to use.
Some users say that oily residue can build up on the interior of their air fryer oven that can be difficult to remove, but wiping it down after each use (after the device has cooled) should help.
You can cook a wide variety of foods in an air fryer oven. Air fryers are often used to cook meats like pork chops and chicken breasts, and they can also be used to cook frozen packaged foods such as french fries and chicken nuggets.
These countertop appliances often have a number of other functions in addition to air frying, making it possible to bake cake and bread, make toast, cook pizzas, roast vegetables, cook roasts and whole chickens, and  dehydrate  fruits, vegetables, and meats.
Many people use air fryer ovens as an alternative to a regular oven. Depending on the size and capabilities of your air fryer oven, you may be able to cook anything you would in a regular oven.
Allow the device to cool. Remove the racks, pans, and drip tray you used during cooking and wash them as you would your regular dishes.
Using a damp cloth, wipe down the exterior and interior of the air fryer oven to remove crumbs and grease.
It’s a good idea to do this after each use to prevent excess grease buildup that will be more difficult to clean later.

The bottom line
Air fryer ovens are a great way to get the benefits of an air fryer, often with many extra features and a larger capacity than standard air fryers.
They come in a variety of sizes and offer numerous features, with many usable as a rotisserie, air fryer, and dehydrator all in one.
Check out the list above to find one that works for you.

References:

https://www.healthline.com#overall
https://www.healthline.com#top-brand
https://www.healthline.com#top-brand
https://www.healthline.com#countertop-convection
https://www.healthline.com#countertop-convection
https://www.healthline.com#countertop-convection
https://www.healthline.com#large
https://www.healthline.com#budget
https://www.healthline.com#families
https://www.healthline.com#single
https://www.healthline.com#high-end
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/greasy-food
https://www.healthline.com/about/vet-brands-and-products
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/air-fryer
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/best-blender-for-smoothies
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/meat-temperature
https://www.getfitdonegame.com/
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/olive-oil-vs-vegetable-oil
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/sweet-potato-fries-vs-french-fries
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/is-pizza-healthy
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/is-rotisserie-chicken-healthy
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/dehydrated-food
