Title: The 7 Best Milk Frothers for Making Coffee Drinks at Home

Here’s our list of the best milk frothers — a must-have tool for up-leveling your at-home latte game. Hint: you might already own one.
Grabbing your morning latte or cappuccino at the nearest coffee house may be a delicious way to start your day, but it can be an expensive habit.
Milk frothers allow you to  recreate those creamy, silky drinks  at home. They can help you turn your  morning ritual  or afternoon pick-me-up into a mindful and pleasurable moment.
If you have a French press, good news — you already have everything you need to foam milk. Just heat your milk of choice using a sauce pan and then pour it into your French press. Move the plunger up and down to create the froth. Then pour it into your espresso or coffee.
But if you don’t have a French press, or are in the market for a dedicated milk frother that will also heat your milk, there are plenty of options to choose from that vary in size, portability, capacity, and price.
Here are seven of our favorite milk frothers.

A quick look at the best milk frothers
Best large capacity electric:   Breville BMF600XL Milk Cafe Frother
Best single serve electric:   Nestle Nespresso Aeroccino 4
Best budget electric:   Bodum Electric Milk Frother
Best for ease of use:   Capresso Froth Plus
Best handheld for frothing only:   Zulay Milk Boss
Best handheld if you want to heat and froth:   Aerolatte
Best manual:   HIC Milk Creamer Frother

Types of milk frothers
Here’s a quick breakdown of the different types of milk frothers you can buy.
Plug-in milk frothers harness the power of electricity to make your milk bubbly and airy.
They’re the most expensive type of milk frother, but in return they require virtually no effort to use. Just pour in your milk, press a button, and voila.
Many electric frothers also heat your milk, which is great news if you enjoy your latte or cappuccino piping hot.
Handheld or motorized whisk frothers are battery-powered units with a small round whisk at the end.
They’re inexpensive, easy to use, and generally small in size. On the downside, they’re typically not as powerful as electric units.
Manual frothers utilize a hand pump to create foam for your favorite beverages.
While typically less expensive than electric models, you’ll need to put in a few minutes of pumping to achieve a solid froth.
The upside is that you don’t need a power outlet or batteries. Plus, these units are generally easy to clean.

How we chose
Here are the criteria we used to decide our picks:
Brand reputation:  We only looked at brands with a solid reputation in the coffee world.
Value:  We included products at a variety of price points and prioritized options that provide a good value.
Customer reviews:  The products featured on this list all have positive reviews from customers.
General price ranges are indicated with dollar signs ($ to $$$) below. One dollar sign means the product is rather affordable, whereas three dollar signs indicate a higher price range.
Pricing guide:
$  = under $40
$$  = $40–$79
$$$  = over $80

Best Electric
Price:  $$$
Capacity:  25 ounces (oz)
Heating option:  yes
Material:  stainless steel
Warranty:  1-year limited
Best for:  making specialty coffee drinks
With its 25-oz (740-mL) jug, this Breville frother offers the largest milk capacity among the options on this list. This allows you to prepare multiple frothy drinks at once.
Aside from the jug, it includes a frothing whisk, a heating whisk, and an electric base. This base offers temperature settings ranging from cold to extremely hot, allowing you to tailor the milk to your temperature preferences.
Another unique feature offered by this Breville frother is the small opening on its lid. Here, you can add spices like  cinnamon  or powdered chocolate while heating and frothing the milk.
The machine works with dairy and nondairy milk and is surprisingly quiet while in use. Plus, the jug is dishwasher safe since all of the electric parts are conveniently placed on the electric base.
On the downside, the minimum amount of milk required for frothing is 6 oz (177 mL). This may lead to waste if you’re preparing a single standard 8-oz (240-mL) cup of Joe or simply prefer less milk in your drink. It’s also the most expensive option on our list.
The frother comes with a 1-year limited warranty. Most of the parts and accessories are also available separately in case you need to replace them.
Worth noting, Breville also tops our list of the  best espresso machines .
large capacity
temperature settings
dishwasher safe
not ideal for single-cup use
pricey
Price:  $$$
Capacity:  8 oz (237 mL)
Heating option:  yes
Material:  stainless steel
Warranty:  2 years
Best for:  pairing with a Nespresso machine
The Nestle Nespresso Aeroccino 4 offers simplicity, convenience, and long-lasting foam.
Unlike alternative options, this frother comes with just one whisk that works with four settings: cold, hot, froth, or extra froth. Thus, you don’t have to remember to swap around whisks or worry about misplacing one.
Despite being electrical, you may submerge it in water or clean it in a dishwasher.
The pitcher comes with a small lip to make pouring easier, and it makes almost no sound while frothing.
But in this case, convenience comes at a price. It’s one of the most expensive frothers on this list, even though it has a lower milk capacity, fitting in just 4 oz (120 mL) for frothing and 8 oz (240 mL) for heating.
The frother comes with a 2-year warranty.
extra froth option
dishwasher safe
easy pour spout
expensive
limited capacity for frothing
Price:  $
Capacity:  10 oz (296 mL)
Heating option:  yes
Material:  nonstick interior
Warranty:  2-year limited
Best for:  versatile coffee making
The Bodum Bistro Electric Milk Frother delivers dense and creamy foam. It features the lowest price among the electric frothers on this list, excluding the handheld and manual options.
This unit includes two main parts: the power base and the electrical pitcher. It has one whisk that works both for making hot foam and for heating. It suits both  dairy  and nondairy milk.
It features a 10-oz (295-mL) heating capacity, and about half of that for frothing. Unlike the other electric frothers on this list, the Bodum Bistro doesn’t deliver cold foam.
One distinctive feature of the Bodum Bistro is that it can heat your milk to 158°F (70°C). If the milk is left in the pitcher and the temperature drops to 122°F (50°C), it will automatically start operating again to reheat or refroth it.
While this frother isn’t dishwasher safe, you may fill it with soapy water and turn it on for easy cleaning. After that, you only have to rinse it with enough water to remove any soap residue.
This frother boasts a 2-year limited warranty.
option to heat without frothing
affordable
reheats milk if the temperature drops
no cold foam option
not dishwasher safe
Price:  $$
Capacity:  12 oz (355 mL)
Heating option:  yes
Material:  scratch-resistant plastic
Warranty:  1-year limited
Best for:  serving guests
The Capresso Froth Plus mixes the large capacity of the Breville frother (though Breville still makes more) and the convenience of the Nespresso Aeroccino 4 at a moderate price.
Like most automatic frothers, it comes with an electric base and removable pitcher. The maximum milk capacity is 8 oz (240 mL) for frothing and 12 oz (355 mL) for heating.
As for the convenience part, the pitcher is made out of a scratch-resistant material and is dishwasher safe.
Another distinctive feature of the Capresso frother is that it comes with three discs total, two for frothing and one for heating.
A frequent user complaint is a relatively short life span of just over 1 year, with defects that may not be covered by its 1-year limited warranty.
scratch-resistant design
dishwasher safe
up to 12 oz (355 mL) capacity for heating milk
durability issues according to some reviewers

Best handheld
Price:  $
Warranty:  lifetime
Best for:  fast, efficient frothing
This powerful handheld frother is battery-operated and works quickly to froth all types of milk.
Healthline’s market nutrition editor, Kelli McGrane, RD, is a fan and has been using it consistently since 2020. She originally bought it at the height of the COVID-19 pandemic to perfect her oat milk lattes at home. It has a simple on/off switch, ergonomic handle, and sturdy stainless steel whisk.
“The frother is easy to hold (a plus as I have small hands) and takes just a few seconds to create perfectly foamed oat milk,” McGrane says, also praising it for being a breeze to clean.
The Milk Boss is available in a range of colors, with and without a stand. If you’re short on counter space, save the money and skip the stand.
Like other handheld frothers on our list, the Milk Boss doesn’t heat milk, so keep in mind that you’ll need to do that part separately. One other potential drawback: it doesn’t have a child safety feature, so you’ll need to keep it stashed securely if you have curious kids at home.
powerful and efficient
easy to use
available with or without stand
no heating options
not dishwasher safe
Price:  $
Warranty:  2 years
Best for:  any recipe that requires whisking
The Aerolatte handheld milk frother has a portable and compact design that easily fits in any drawer. It comes with a counter stand and protective cases are available as well.
This battery-operated device has a long wand with a frothing whisk at the end and an on-off switch. It’s made from stainless steel and is available in four colors.
While it froths all  types of milk , including nondairy types, but you must heat the milk beforehand if you want it warm. Unlike an electric frother, this one won’t heat the milk for you.
Make sure not to turn it on until the whisk is completely submerged in the milk. Otherwise, you risk splashing all over the kitchen counter.
This handy frother can double as a multipurpose whisking tool. For instance, you can use it to make sauces and dressings.
It’s a budget-friendly choice, easy to clean, comes with a counter stand, and offers a 2-year warranty.
includes a counter stand
budget-friendly
easy to clean
can’t heat milk
not as powerful as an electric frother

Best manual
Price:  $
Capacity:  14 oz (414 mL)
Material:  stainless steel
Warranty:  2 years
Best for:  kitchens without a convenient outlet
The HIC Milk Creamer Frother is an excellent alternative if you’re looking for a frother that doesn’t require batteries or electricity. Using it takes a little extra work compared with using an electric device.
It’s made out of stainless steel. The lid has a wire whisk with a handle. Manually pump it up and down roughly 20 times to froth the milk.
As it doesn’t have a heating function, you’ll need to preheat the milk before frothing if you prefer it warmed.
Alternatively, due to its heat-resistant material, you can place it directly onto the stovetop and heat the milk straight in it. Just keep in mind that some users report that this can overheat the bottom and burn the milk.
It has a generous 14-oz (414-mL) milk capacity and froths both dairy and nondairy milk.
Additionally, it’s easy to clean, dishwasher safe, affordable, and comes with a 2-year warranty.
stainless steel design
stovetop safe
dishwasher safe
can’t heat milk
requires some effort to use

How do I choose a frother?
There are multiple variables you should take into account when choosing a milk frother, including:
Price:  Handheld and manual frothers are generally on the cheaper side but still deliver excellent results.
Size and portability:  Electric and manual frothers are considerably larger than the handheld ones. Handheld and manual milk frothers work great anywhere you go.
Ease of cleaning:  Manual milk frothers are typically the easiest to clean since you don’t need to worry about getting any handles or electronics wet. However, some electric picks on our list are dishwasher safe (just make sure to read the manufacturer’s instructions).
Ease of use:  If you’re looking for a frother that does the full job for you, an electric frother may be best, followed by the handheld ones.
Type:  Electric, handheld, and manual frothers all have their pros and cons. Make sure you’re considering the features and considerations that matter most to you to zero in on the which type will best suit your needs.

Comparing brands

Frequently asked questions about milk frothers
A frother uses a motorized whisk to froth milk, while a steamer uses pressurized steam to heat milk and create smooth microfoam.
In most cases, you’ll get more foam with a milk frother because the process of frothing introduces air into the milk, which is what makes it so light and foamy. Steamed milk isn’t quite as foamy, with a more velvety texture.
While the textures are slightly different, you probably don’t need a separate frother if your espresso machine has a steam wand.
That depends on whether it’s dishwasher safe or not. Dishwasher safe units can go straight into the dishwasher. Those that aren’t can be cleaned by adding a little soapy water to the interior and turning on the machine.
You can clean handheld units by running them in soapy water, while manual units should be cleaned with warm water and soap.
Milk with a higher fat content will work best, but you can experiment with different brands and types of milk.

The bottom line
Milk frothers can help you enjoy creamy  lattes and cappuccinos  at home.
If you’re interested in buying one, consider reviewing the features that are most important to you. These may include the available counter or drawer space in your kitchen, ease of cleaning, price, size, temperature features, and if the device works well with your milk of choice.
Once you’ve set your frothing priorities, you’ll find numerous options that can be divided into different functional categories, including electrical, handheld, or manual frothers.
Ultimately, they’ll all deliver a silky and creamy foam to add on top of your favorite drink.

References:

https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/cappuccino-vs-latte-vs-macchiato
https://www.healthline.com/health/healthy-morning-routine
https://www.healthline.com#breville
https://www.healthline.com#nestle
https://www.healthline.com#bodum
https://www.healthline.com#capresso
https://www.healthline.com#editor
https://www.healthline.com#aerolatte
https://www.healthline.com#hic
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/10-proven-benefits-of-cinnamon
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/best-kitchen-tools
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/is-dairy-bad-or-good
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/healthiest-milk
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/cappuccino-vs-latte-vs-macchiato
