Title: How We Evaluate Online GLP-1 Providers

Glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor (GLP-1) agonist medications have become increasingly popular thanks to their effectiveness for weight loss and blood sugar management.
To get these medications, you must meet certain  eligibility criteria  and get a prescription from a licensed healthcare professional, such as a primary care physician, endocrinologist, nurse practitioner, or physician assistant.
While some people may meet with their healthcare professional in person, others may prefer the convenience of an online platform. If you opt for the online route, it’s essential to choose a reputable platform that offers plenty of support and resources.
At Healthline, we take choosing which online GLP-1 providers to feature in our content very seriously. Keep reading to learn more about how we vet these platforms and what we look for when determining which ones to recommend.

How we vet online GLP-1 providers
All online GLP-1 providers featured on Healthline must first pass our rigorous  vetting process .
During vetting, our Medical Standards and Insights team considers numerous factors, including:
company reputation
medical credibility
marketing claims
medications offered
overall approach to well-being
Because the landscape of GLP-1 medications is constantly evolving, our vetting team monitors these providers on a yearly cadence.

Our editorial process for choosing GLP-1 providers
When deciding which GLP-1 providers to feature in our various roundups, Healthline’s editors and expert writers — including registered dietitians and those with backgrounds in the health and medical fields — research each platform to better understand what it offers and who it might be a good fit for.
At a high level, the key factors we’re looking for when determining whether to recommend an online GLP-1 provider include:
Medication availability:  It might sound obvious, but we always double-check to make sure the platform offers the medication in question. Ideally, we look for platforms offering multiple GLP-1 medications so that you have access to  alternatives  just in case.
Health goal:  While some platforms offer access to endocrinologists and certified diabetes educators, others are better suited for people only interested in weight loss. We take these factors into account, especially when recommending platforms for people with  type 2 diabetes .
Cost:  Online platforms vary greatly in price, including consultation fees and monthly subscription costs. Additionally, some are eligible for insurance coverage, while others require paying fully out of pocket. We look for options that take insurance when possible and try to include options at a variety of price points.
Resources and support:  With  GLP-1 medications,  you slowly ramp up doses over time, and side effects can be serious. For these reasons, we prioritize online platforms that offer ongoing support and medical monitoring. Additionally, because these medications are effective when paired with lifestyle changes, we look for platforms that include additional resources to help you on your wellness journey. Examples include one-on-one coaching, educational content, support groups, recipes, and food tracking.
Reviews:  To better understand each program, we read countless online reviews and asked friends, family members, and co-workers about their experiences.
Two major concerns with getting GLP-1 medications online include risks of financial scams and counterfeit medications, which is why our vetting team carefully reviews each company to ensure its legitimacy.
Compounded drugs are another potential issue to be aware of. Because GLP-1 medications are expensive and sometimes hard to get, more and more online companies have started to offer compounded versions at significantly lower costs.
The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) doesn’t approve compounded versions of injectable GLP-1 receptor agonist medications and warns against using them.
Read more about  safety concerns around compounded semaglutide .

Recommended pages
Whether you’re ready to select an online provider or simply want to learn more about how to get a prescription for GLP-1 medication, the articles below are good places to start. You can also read our  expert’s guide to GLP-1 medications .

References:

https://www.healthline.com/health/type-2-diabetes/considering-glp1s
https://www.healthline.com/about/vet-brands-and-products
https://www.healthline.com/health/drugs/ozempic-alternatives
https://www.healthline.com/health/type-2-diabetes/glp-1-receptor-agonists-treatment
https://www.healthline.com/health/drugs/ozempic-dosage
https://www.healthline.com/health/is-compounded-semaglutide-safe
https://www.healthline.com/health/weight-loss/glp1-for-weight-loss