Title: Nurture Life: Review, Menu, Options, and More

Nurture Life is a healthy meal delivery service for all ages, offering dietitian-designed meals that are nutritious and likely appealing to picky eaters.
The company offers finger foods for baby-led weaning, meals for toddlers, kids, teens, and adults, as well as meals that the whole family can share.
The meals are precooked and ready to heat and eat upon arrival.
This article reviews Nurture Life, the types of food it offers, its pricing and delivery, and pros and cons.
offers meals for all ages from 10 months up
nutritious and appealing to picky eaters
gluten-free, vegetarian, and allergen-free options are available
free shipping and discounts with large orders
more expensive than comparable alternatives
unsuitable for people with celiac disease or severe food allergies

What is Nurture Life?
Nurture Life is a meal delivery service that offers foods for the whole family, from infants to adults.
The meals are designed by  registered dietitians  and include organic produce, whole grains, and healthy protein sources.
They’re fully cooked, so you only need to reheat them prior to eating.
Nurture Life is a weekly subscription service. However, it’s easy to skip weeks or pause your subscription.

Meal plans and menu options
Nurture Life offers several menus with a variety of meal choices for all ages:
Baby 10–24 months.  This menu features finger foods that are appropriate for  self-feeding . Meals include chicken, sweet potato, and waffle, mac and cheese with peas, and mini falafel, carrot, and rice.
Toddler 1–4 years.  This menu offers veggie-filled toddler favorites for kids 4 years old and under. Meals include chicken bites with mashed sweet potatoes, build-your-own pizza with Italian sausage and apple slices, and mac and cheese with butternut squash.
Kid 5–12 years.  These larger servings are geared toward growing children under the age of 13. Meals include teriyaki salmon with rainbow veggie rice, chicken Parmesan with broccoli, and chicken meatball slider with carrots and pear slices.
Teens and adults 13 years and up.  These meals are made for teenage and adult appetites, so the portions are generous. Meals include chicken biryani, pot roast with mashed potatoes, and tortellini alfredo with asparagus.
Cold lunches.  Nurture Life offers three varieties of cold lunches that are great for school meals — chicken meatball slider with carrots and pear slices, build-your-own pizza with Italian sausage and apple slices, and cheesy pesto tortellini with chicken breast and carrots.
Shareables.  These are entrées and sides that come in portions large enough to feed two to four people. Options include mushroom and truffle ravioli, chicken meatballs with marinara and Parmesan, and maple glazed heirloom carrots.

Ingredients, nutrition, and food quality
Nurture Life uses  organic  ingredients when available. According to the company’s website, the service sources animal proteins from “trusted purveyors” who meet Nurture Life’s quality and food safety standards.
For example, the company uses antibiotic-free chicken, and Aquaculture Stewardship Council (ASC)-certified salmon.
Complete nutrition information and ingredient lists for all meals are available on the Nurture Life website.
To some degree, Nurture Life can accommodate special dietary needs or food allergies.
The company offers several gluten-free meals, but the facility itself uses gluten-containing ingredients, so there’s a risk of cross contamination. Therefore, this service may not be right for people with  celiac disease .
Additionally, the company’s facility is completely free of peanuts and tree nuts, but other common allergens may be used in some dishes.
You can filter meal options by “picky eater fav,” vegetarian, and soy-, gluten-, egg-, coconut-, fish-, pork-, milk-, and sesame-free.
Note that the vegetarian options are  lacto-ovo-vegetarian , so they may contain dairy and eggs.

Pricing
Here is the pricing for Nurture Life meals by age:
The minimum order size is $39 with an $8 shipping fee. However, if you spend at least $59, you get free shipping. If you spend at least $79, you get free shipping and 5% off your total. Finally, if you spend at least $99, you receive free shipping and 10% off your total.
If you don’t pause, cancel, skip, or change your order by the order cut-off date, you will receive the same shipment you last ordered.

Delivery
Nurture Life delivers anywhere in the contiguous United States, but it currently doesn’t serve Alaska or Hawaii.
The company uses the United Parcel Service (UPS) and United Delivery Service (UDS) for shipping. The meals are not frozen but packaged to stay at or below refrigerated temperatures for at least 48 hours until they arrive at your residence.
To ensure maximum freshness, refrigerate them as soon as you get them. If you don’t plan to eat them within 1 week, they can be frozen for up to 90 days.
For orders under $59, shipping costs $8.

Pros
For busy families, Nurture Life provides convenient  meal options for family members  of all ages. The meals are also healthy and packed with fresh, organic produce.
The prices are comparable to those of a restaurant, but the food is likely much more nutritious.
Additionally, the company’s pricing structure incentivizes larger orders with free shipping and discounts, so Nurture Life could be a good option for small families and large households alike.

Cons
Nurture Life meals can be expensive — much more so than comparable infant or toddler meals you may find at the grocery store.
However, the service offers discounts and free shipping for large orders. Plus, if you’re regularly spending money dining out, investing in Nurture Life may be worth the expense to give your family some healthier options.
Nurture Life may also not be a good fit for your household if anyone in your family has severe  food allergies  or needs to follow a strict gluten-free diet for medical reasons like celiac disease.

Is it recommended?
Overall, Nurture Life is a great choice for families looking for convenient, healthy meals that appeal to children.
Although Nurture Life is more expensive than some alternatives, its meals are designed by registered dietitians, nutritionally balanced, and easy to reheat and eat.
To minimize the cost of each order — and since the meals can be frozen for up to 90 days — you can easily skip weeks until you can place an order that’s $99 or more, which would qualify for free shipping and a 10% discount.

The bottom line
Nurture Life is a meal delivery service that provides heat-and-eat meals for people of all ages. The meals contain healthy ingredients and are designed to appeal to kids and  picky eaters .
Although it’s more expensive than other convenient options like fast food or frozen meals from the grocery store, it may be worth using this service if you’re looking for healthier options to feed your family.

References:

https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/dietitian-vs-nutritionist
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/baby-led-weaning
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/what-is-organic-food
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/celiac-disease-symptoms
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/lacto-ovo-vegetarian-diet
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/one-week-family-meal-plan-shopping-list
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/common-food-allergies
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/tips-for-picky-eaters
