Title: The Best Pedometers


A quick look at the best pedometers
Best overall:  Fitbit Inspire 2
Best for walking:   3D TriSport Walking Pedometer
Best for running:   Garmin 010-12520-00 Running Dynamics Pod
Best value:  Lintelek Fitness Tracker
High end:  Garmin Vivosmart 4
Most user-friendly:   3DFitBud Simple Step Counter
Best wristband:   Letscom Fitness Tracker
Best smartwatch:   Garmin Vivoactive 4S
Easiest to read:   OZO Fitness SC2 Digital Pedometer
Pedometers are a useful tool for tracking your steps and reaching your fitness goals.
However, with so many types available, it can be challenging to determine which is right for you. While some offer only basic functions like activity tracking, others provide a variety of other features designed to help you take control of your health.

How to choose the best pedometer
With so many products available, it can be tricky to find a pedometer that meets your needs.
For starters, be sure to consider whether you’d prefer a specific type of pedometer, such as a clip or wristband. While clips can be convenient and easy to use, wristbands often offer additional features beyond simply counting your steps.
If you also want to monitor other aspects of health, you can look for a pedometer that includes additional features such as sleep tracking, heart rate monitoring, or sport-specific modes.
Keep in mind that products that offer these features are also usually more expensive, which may be an important consideration if you’re on a tight budget.

How we chose the best pedometers
The products included in this article were selected based on the following criteria:
Features.  Pedometers may include additional features like activity tracking, heart rate monitoring, smartphone integration, and sleep tracking.
Customer reviews.  Pedometers have mostly positive customer reviews.
Value.  Pedometers provide a good value for the price.
Here are 9 of the best pedometers of 2021.
General price ranges with dollar signs ($–$$$) are indicated below. One dollar sign means the product is rather affordable, whereas three dollar signs indicate a higher cost.
Generally, list prices range from $24.99–$329.99, but this may vary depending on available discounts and where you shop.
Pricing guide:
$  = under $50
$$  = $50–$100
$$$  = over $100

Healthline’s picks of the 9 best pedometers
Price:  $$
Pros:  sleep tracking, 10-day battery life, heart rate monitor
Cons:  dim display, limited features, scratches easily
With its slim design, built-in heart monitor, and all-day activity tracker, the Fitbit Inspire 2 is one of the best pedometers on the market.
You can purchase the  Inspire 2 Clip  to easily convert the wristband to a clip-on that attaches to a belt, pocket, or waistband.
It syncs with your smartphone and makes it easy to keep tabs on your daily steps, distance, calories burned, and hourly activity. Plus, by staying active you can earn Active Zone Minutes, which encourage you to progress toward your weekly fitness goals.
It’s also water-resistant up to 164 feet (50 meters) and even provides detailed information on your sleep quality each night.
Price:  $
Pros:  accurate, user-friendly, large display
Cons:  no app connectivity, belt clip may detach
This pedometer is highly accurate and simple to use, making it a great choice to track your steps on walks and hikes.
You can clip it onto your clothing, use it with a lanyard, or place it in your bag or pocket for easy use.
It also includes a large display, built-in clock, and daily step goal to help you stay active.
Price:  $$
Pros:  lightweight, tracks six running metrics, can help you analyze your running form
Cons:  easy to lose, requires compatible Garmin watch
For runners looking to boost their performance, this pedometer from Garmin may be worth the investment.
Besides counting your total steps, it tracks six running dynamic metrics, including your stride length, cadence, and the amount of time you spend on the ground with each step.
Additionally, it weighs less than 5 ounces (142 grams) and conveniently clips onto your waistband to maximize comfort during your run.
Price:  $
Pros:  affordable, comfortable, USB charger
Cons:  heart rate readings may not always be accurate, dim display
This high quality activity tracker offers a range of fitness-related features at an affordable price.
It not only displays your daily steps, calories burned, and distance but also offers 14 sport-specific modes to track other forms of physical activity. Plus, it pairs with your phone to notify you of incoming calls and messages.
Price:  $$$
Pros:  lightweight, heart rate tracking, long battery life
Cons:  small screen, inaccurate sleep tracking
Equipped with a variety of tools to help monitor your health, the Garmin Vivosmart 4 is a high end pedometer that doubles as an activity tracker.
It records several metrics of health, including your heart rate, stress levels, sleep quality, rate of oxygen consumption, and blood oxygen levels.
Additionally, it syncs with your phone and uses GPS navigation to provide you with highly accurate data during outdoor runs, walks, and hikes.
Price:  $
Pros:  large display, user-friendly, protects privacy
Cons:  bulky design, clip may fall off, defective reset button
If you’re looking for a simple pedometer that’s ready to use with no setup required, check out this step counter from 3DFitBud.
Unlike other pedometers, it doesn’t require you to download any apps or connect with other devices to get started.
It features an extra-large, easy-to-read display and includes a removable clip and lanyard so that you can wear your pedometer several ways.
Price:  $
Pros:  USB charger, heart rate monitor, 14 sport modes
Cons:  dim display, connectivity issues
Wristbands can be a convenient alternative to clip-on pedometers.
This wristband fitness tracker from Letscom includes a heart rate monitor, 14 sport modes, and a built-in USB plug for quick and easy charging.
What’s more, it syncs to your phone for smart notifications and sends reminders to stay active throughout the day.
Price:  $$$
Pros:  color touch screen, sets goals, internal music storage
Cons:  dim display, scratches easily, sleep tracking needs improvement
The Garmin Vivoactive 4S tracks your steps and health data such as stress, sleep, and heart rate.
It comes with more than 20 activity apps, including yoga, swimming, and running. The device also works well for golfing, biking, and weightlifting.
You can customize the functions and create personalized workouts.
This smaller smartwatch offers internal music storage, so you can download your favorite music. The highly accurate GPS is ideal for outdoor activities.
Price:  $
Pros:  affordable, large display, 30-day memory log
Cons:  difficult to program, clip may fall off
The OZO Fitness SC 3D Pedometer tracks your steps, distance, and calories burned. It comes with a clock, activity timer, and 30-day memory log that tracks your progress.
You can use the pedometer to set daily step target goals, which may increase motivation. Plus, it automatically resets each night at midnight.
This no-frills device is easy to use and doesn’t require Bluetooth, an app, or a smartphone. The large display screen is easily readable, making it ideal for people with vision concerns.

Product comparison
Use this table to see how the pedometers compare.

Which kind of pedometer is the most accurate?
Pedometer accuracy can depend on the brand, the type of device, and the step length the brand uses to calculate step count. Usually, pedometers are less accurate outside of controlled settings.
Factors such as body weight, device angle, and walking speed can also influence accuracy.
A small 2017 study with 12 participants suggests that waist pedometers may offer more accuracy than wrist pedometers and that less costly models may be more accurate than more expensive ones ( 1 ).
Additionally, a 2018 review suggests that step counting is most accurate when a Fitbit device is worn on the ankle or torso, followed by the wrist. Mobility limitations and body movements can also affect accuracy ( 2 ).

Where is the best place to wear your pedometer?
To increase accuracy, it’s best to wear your pedometer on your ankle, waist, or wrist. Even though wristbands may be less accurate, they may be more accessible and convenient.
Wrist devices do not measure steps when your wrist is still, such as when you hold on to a handrail while walking. They also incorrectly track steps if you move your arms while performing a task, such as a household chore.

Frequently asked questions
The best device for counting steps is a pedometer or step counter.
A pedometer can monitor your activity, fitness progress, and metrics, including steps per day. Viewing and tracking your results may motivate you to achieve your fitness goals.
Pedometers may be beneficial to your health. A 2017 review found that using a pedometer may encourage people to make positive behavior changes and increase physical activity by 2,500 steps per day ( 3 ).
Pedometer use has also been linked to weight loss and decreased blood pressure ( 4 ).
A pedometer measures the number of steps you take and the distance you travel. Advanced models track additional metrics such as heart rate, sleep, and stress. Certain devices also record blood oxygen levels, calories burned, and activity duration.

The bottom line
Pedometers are useful for tracking your daily steps. A variety of brands and products are available, each offering a unique set of features and functions.
When selecting a pedometer, consider factors like how much you want to spend, whether you prefer a clip or band, and which features are most important to you.

References:

https://www.healthline.com#overall
https://www.healthline.com#walking
https://www.healthline.com#running
https://www.healthline.com#value
https://www.healthline.com#high-end
https://www.healthline.com#user-friendly
https://www.healthline.com#wristband
https://www.healthline.com#smartwatch
https://www.healthline.com#read
https://www.fitbit.com/global/us/products/accessories/inspire2-clip?correlationId=null
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5214549/
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6107736/
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5488109/
https://www.healthline.comhttps://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28188319/
