Title: HelloFresh vs. Blue Apron: A Dietitian’s Honest Review

HelloFresh and Blue Apron are among the most popular meal kit delivery services on the market.
They both offer a rotating selection of weekly recipes with step-by-step instructions and preportioned ingredients. However, there are also some differences to consider.
This article takes a closer look at HelloFresh and Blue Apron and how they compare.

Basics
HelloFresh and Blue Apron are two meal kit companies that make it easier to enjoy  healthy, home-cooked meals .
With both companies, you choose from a selection of meals each week. Then, all the ingredients you need to prepare those meals are delivered to your door alongside recipe cards.
HelloFresh lets you select 2–6 recipes per week, with two or four servings each. While selecting your meals, you can also order additional sides and add-ons from the HelloFresh Market.
Similarly, Blue Apron allows you to select 2–4 recipes per week, with either two or four servings in each recipe.
For an additional charge, you can also order add-ons from Blue Apron, including breakfast dishes, proteins, sides, desserts, or wines.

Pros and cons at a glance

Who tried it?

Getting started
When signing up with HelloFresh, you can select your food preferences from six available plans. Then, you can select the number of meals and servings you’d like to order.
Though you can view and order meals from the full menu, your selections will determine which recipes HelloFresh displays first.
After selecting your plan, you’ll be asked to enter your shipping address and payment details. You can also choose which date you’d like to receive your first delivery and enter any delivery instructions, if applicable.
Once you’ve finished checkout, you can select the meals you’d like to receive in your first order. Alternatively, you can allow HelloFresh to select recipes for you based on your preferences.
You can skip weeks, adjust your preferences, or cancel your subscription if necessary.
To sign up for Blue Apron, you’ll choose from five meal preferences, including a mix of meal kits and heat-and-eat meals. Then you can decide how many recipes and servings you’d like to receive each week.
During this step, you can choose whether you’d like to receive two, three, or four meals per week. Each meal contains two or four servings.
Once you’ve selected your plan, you can input your delivery address and payment information. You can also select your first delivery date after entering your zip code.
After checkout, you can choose your meals from the specific menu you selected. You can change your preferences, skip a week, or cancel your subscription anytime.

Types of meals
HelloFresh features a rotating menu with over 30 meals each week and provides options for different dietary needs, including  vegetarian , pescatarian, Mediterranean, family-friendly, lower calorie, lower carb, or quick and easy meals.
They have multiple plans to choose from, including:
Veggie:  plant-based meals, including vegan and vegetarian options
Pescatarian:  meals that are plant-based or contain seafood
Family Friendly:  kid-friendly recipes that are easy to prepare
Meat & Veggies:  meals that include meat and vegetables
Fit & Wholesome:  meals contain 650 calories or fewer per serving
Quick and Easy:  meals that require less preparation and are ready in 30 minutes or less
Note that you can still select meals from the full menu each week even if you choose one of the preferences listed above.
HelloFresh also labels certain items on their menu to help you find suitable options, including meals that are:
calorie smart
carb smart
easy cleanup
easy prep
quick
Mediterranean
spicy
vegan
Additionally, HelloFresh allows you to indicate certain protein types you’d like to avoid, including beef, pork, and seafood.
You can also change, swap, or upgrade your proteins and sides for select meals from HelloFresh. However, this is not available for all plans or recipes.
Blue Apron offers both prepared meals and meal kits and has five preferences to choose from, including:
Chef Favorites:  favorite recipes from Blue Apron’s chefs
Wellness:  nutritionist-approved, including WW-recommended and carb-conscious recipes
Family Friendly:  meals designed to be kid-friendly
Fast & Easy:  Quick Prep and Heat & Eat meals
Veggies:  plant-based dishes
When you browse the menu, you’ll see four categories:
Signature:  includes meat- and plant-based items, WW-approved meals, and diabetes-friendly recipes
Signature for 4:  includes most recipes from the Signature menu, with four servings each
Wellness for 2:  nutritionist-approved recipes, including several that are WW-approved and carb-conscious
Vegetarian for 2:  meat-free dishes that feature seasonal produce
Vegetarian and WW-approved meals are also labeled on their menu. Additionally, Blue Apron labels items that are:
chef favorites
family-friendly
ready to cook
heat & eat
premium
craft
Like with HelloFresh, you can choose your favorite recipes from their weekly menu. Optionally, you can choose from a variety of add-ons, including side dishes, breakfasts, and desserts. You can also order meal kit bundles, holiday boxes, and wines in the Blue Apron Market.
Blue Apron allows you to indicate certain protein types you’d prefer to avoid, though the service doesn’t currently allow you to make changes to the proteins or sides included in any recipes.
Compared to HelloFresh, Blue Apron has slightly fewer options overall, with around 19 recipes on the Signature menu each week.

Diet friendliness
HelloFresh caters to several eating patterns, including vegetarian,  pescatarian , Mediterranean, and low calorie diets. They also offer a few items that are vegan and carb smart, which are labeled on their menu.
Although each recipe’s nutritional information and ingredients are available online, options may still be limited for more restrictive diet plans, including paleo, ketogenic, or vegan diets.
For comparison, Blue Apron offers vegetarian dishes and features several Wellness recipes in their weekly menu. A few of the Wellness recipes are also plant-based.
According to the company, Wellness menu items are nutritionist-approved and designed to promote holistic health. Some of these recipes are also WW-approved, which may benefit those managing their weight.
That said, Blue Apron also has slightly less variety, with just 4–5 vegetarian recipes available each week and limited options for other dietary restrictions like pescatarian, vegan, paleo, low carb, or ketogenic diets.
Both HelloFresh and Blue Apron label recipes that contain allergens on their menus, which can be helpful for those with a food allergy.
However, because ingredients are processed in a facility that also processes major allergens, there is a risk of cross-contamination. Those with severe allergies or intolerances should exercise caution when using either service.

Cost and shipping
The prices for both Blue Apron and HelloFresh depend on the plan and number of meals that you select, with both starting at $7.99 per serving.
HelloFresh also charges a shipping fee applied during checkout based on your location.
Blue Apron charges a $9.99 shipping fee for all orders, regardless of which plan you select.
HelloFresh and Blue Apron are available in most areas, offering shipping throughout the contiguous United States. Delivery is not currently available in Hawaii or Alaska for either service.

Packaging and sustainability
One of my favorite aspects of HelloFresh’s packaging was that the ingredients were grouped by recipe in brown paper bags. Not only did this help keep my fridge organized, but it also made preparing the meals even easier as I didn’t have to search for each item.
HelloFresh uses insulated liners, gel packs, and meal kit bags that are mostly recyclable, depending on your local recycling program.
I also appreciated that the company offers detailed information on its website and app with recycling instructions for each part of its packaging to promote sustainability.
Unlike HelloFresh, Blue Apron’s ingredients arrive loose in the delivery box. While slightly less convenient, all my items still appeared fresh and in good condition.
One of my favorite aspects of Blue Apron’s packaging was that the salmon was vacuum-sealed for freshness and the chicken was wrapped in two layers of plastic to prevent any juices from seeping out — an issue I’ve experienced twice with HelloFresh.
According to Blue Apron, over 85% of their packaging is recyclable, including  plastic materials , metal cans, glass bottles, boxes, and inserts.
As with HelloFresh, Blue Apron’s website includes recycling instructions for each part of its packaging.

Ingredient quality
HelloFresh’s weekly menus feature a variety of  protein sources  and seasonal ingredients to help add diversity to your diet.
They also prioritize animal welfare and sustainability by sourcing meat, fish, and poultry from trusted suppliers.
Although most produce is not organic, they focus on providing high quality fresh fruits and vegetables that look and taste good.
During my taste test, I found most of the ingredients to be fresh and in good condition upon arrival. However, the  garlic  for one of my recipes was rotten — luckily I keep a stash of pre-minced garlic in my fridge.
I’ve since tried HelloFresh several times, and while I’ve received chicken that’s gone bad twice, most of the time I don’t have any issues with ingredient freshness.
While Blue Apron offers a slightly smaller weekly menu, their recipes still feature a good variety of grains, proteins, vegetables, herbs, and spices.
Blue Apron sources ingredients from trusted farmers, ranchers, and fisheries that prioritize sustainability. Plus, all ingredients are free from genetically modified organisms (GMOs), antibiotics, and hormones.
In fact, except for  Sunbasket , I found Blue Apron’s fish to be the freshest and highest quality out of more than 25 meal delivery services I’ve tried.

Meal preparation and taste
I’ve tried HelloFresh several times, once as a taste test for Healthline and another through my own subscription. During the taste test, I tried the following entrees:
Turkish-Spiced Chicken in Apricot Pan Sauce
Thai Shrimp with Candied Peanuts
Pan-Fried Garlic Herb Gnocchi
The meals were easy to make, with the Thai Shrimp and Pan-Fried Gnocchi recipes taking fewer than 30 minutes to prepare.
My family — including a picky toddler — enjoyed the flavors of each dish. In particular, I loved how fresh and colorful the Thai Shrimp with Candied Peanuts was.
I added  more vegetables  to the Turkish-Spiced Chicken and the Pan-Fried Gnocchi dishes to make the meals more balanced. I also used pre-minced garlic from my fridge to replace the rotten garlic I received with the Thai Shrimp recipe.
While I’ve experienced occasional issues with ingredient freshness, and there are meal kits that I like better for their creative ingredient combinations, HelloFresh is one I keep coming back to, as it’s more affordable and offers  family-friendly flavors  that my toddler enjoys.
During my taste test for Healthline, I tried two meals from Blue Apron:
Spanish-Spiced Salmon and Veggie Quinoa with Almond-Date Topping
Seared Chicken and Creamy Italian Dressing with Mashed Potatoes and Glazed Vegetables
The  salmon  was incredibly fresh and not at all fishy, which I attribute to its vacuum-sealed packaging. I also really enjoyed the variety of flavors and textures in the dish. In fact, I saved the recipe card and have since made the recipe on my own several times.
It’s worth noting that while it took fewer than 30 minutes to prepare, the recipe did involve quite a bit of multitasking.
The chicken recipe was a bit of a mixed bag compared to the salmon dish. On one hand, the dressing was wonderfully tangy and creamy, and the vegetables were cooked perfectly and had a nice sweetness.
However, because you prepare the mashed potatoes first, they were cold by the time the rest of the food was cooked. I also added  Greek yogurt  to the potatoes to make them a bit creamier.
The chicken turned out juicy, though I wished it had been a bit more flavorful without needing to salt it heavily.

How do customers feel about HelloFresh and Blue Apron?
At the time of publication, HelloFresh is not currently accredited by the  Better Business Bureau (BBB)  but holds an A rating. This is determined by factors like the company’s business practices and complaint history.
On  Trustpilot , HelloFresh has an average rating of 3.9 out of 5 stars, which is based on 39,364 customer reviews.
Positive reviews on Trustpilot note that the service is convenient and tasty, with many reviewers stating that the preportioned meals can benefit weight management.
On the other hand, less favorable reviews report experiencing issues with late shipments, spoiled or low quality ingredients, and wasteful packaging.
A few also note that some recipes can seem repetitive, especially if you’re using the service for a long time.
Blue Apron is also not accredited by the  BBB  and currently holds a B- rating.
On  Trustpilot , the company has a rating of 4.1 out of 5 stars, which is based on 5,541 customer reviews.
Many customers on Trustpilot note that the service is consistent and offers a diverse selection of menu options, most of which are easy to prepare.
However, several reviews also mention poor quality produce and missing ingredients in multiple deliveries.
Some customers also state that there are often packaging issues. One review notes that the ingredients are not separated by recipe, making it more challenging to organize and store items.
If you have any issues with your HelloFresh order, you can contact a customer service representative by phone or use the live chat on their website for easy assistance.
Meanwhile, Blue Apron customers can submit a help ticket online or contact customer service by phone or email.
Blue Apron and HelloFresh also present an extensive section of frequently asked questions on their website with information about common issues related to orders and deliveries.

Are HelloFresh and Blue Apron worth trying?
Whether you’re looking to enjoy more healthy, high quality meals at home or want to brush up on your cooking skills, HelloFresh and Blue Apron are both great options.
Not only are both services available throughout the United States, but they’re also similar in terms of price, packaging, and sustainability.
HelloFresh boasts a larger menu and caters to several diets, so it may be more suitable for those with specific dietary restrictions or food preferences. It also offers more kid-friendly recipes, making it a better option for families.
On the other hand, those following  Weight Watchers (WW)  may prefer the WW-approved meals provided by Blue Apron.
Blue Apron also offers add-ons like desserts and a la carte proteins plus pantry items like meal kit bundles, wines, spices, and cooking tools in the Blue Apron Market.
Therefore, the best way to decide which service is right for you is to look at each menu to determine which is a better fit for your taste buds.

How do HelloFresh and Blue Apron compare to other meal delivery services?
HelloFresh and Blue Apron are far from the only meal delivery services available. Here’s a quick look at how they compare to  Home Chef ,  EveryPlate , and  Green Chef .

Frequently asked questions
Though HelloFresh and Blue Apron share several similarities, there are also many key differences.
For instance, HelloFresh boasts a larger menu with more customization options than Blue Apron. However, while HelloFresh only offers meal kits and market add-ons, Blue Apron also provides several fully prepared meals ready to reheat and enjoy along with some unique market items like wines and cooking tools.
Blue Apron is a budget-friendly service that offers a variety of WW-approved options, including an assortment of meal kits and prepared meals.
The service also provides many add-ons such as breakfasts, side dishes, and desserts. Plus, you can order meal kit bundles, holiday boxes, wines, and pantry items through the Blue Apron Market.
Finding the best meal delivery service depends on your needs and preferences.
For example, if you’re looking for a meal delivery service that uses high quality, organic ingredients and caters to a wider range of dietary restrictions, you may want to consider trying Green Chef.
If price is a concern, a budget-friendly alternative like EveryPlate might be a better option.
Additionally, services like Home Chef or Blue Apron may be a better fit if you’re interested in trying a mix of meal kits and ready-made meals.

The bottom line
HelloFresh and Blue Apron are two popular  meal kit delivery services  that make it easy to prepare healthy meals at home.
Both services are similar in terms of availability, price, and sustainability.
However, while some may enjoy HelloFresh’s larger, more diverse menu, others might prefer the selection of WW-approved meals from Blue Apron.
Be sure to consider all the factors listed above and check out each menu to determine which service is right for you.

References:

https://www.healthline.com/health/food-nutrition/home-cooking-versus-takeout
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/vegetarian-diet-plan
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/pescatarian-diet
https://www.healthline.com/health/reusing-plastic-bottles
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/20-delicious-high-protein-foods
https://www.healthline.com/health/garlic-for-yeast-infection
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/sun-basket-review
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/17-ways-to-eat-more-veggies
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/meal-delivery-for-kids
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/salmon-nutrition-and-health-benefits
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/greek-yogurt-benefits
https://www.bbb.org/us/ny/new-york/profile/food-delivery/hellofresh-0121-142623
https://www.trustpilot.com/review/hellofresh.com
https://www.bbb.org/us/ny/new-york/profile/food-delivery/blue-apron-inc-0121-145032
https://www.trustpilot.com/review/blueapron.com
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/weight-watchers-diet-review
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/home-chef-review
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/everyplate-review
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/green-chef-review
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/best-meal-delivery-service
