Title: 12 of the Best Cheap Exercise Bikes


A quick look at the best affordable exercise bikes
Best overall:   Sunny Health & Fitness Programmable Recumbent Bike
Best for multitasking:   FlexiSpot Adjustable Exercise Workstation Bike Desk
Best for the office:  DeskCycle 2
Best recumbent:   ProForm 325 CSX Recumbent Bike
Best upright:  Schwinn Fitness 130 Upright Exercise Bike
Best for small spaces:   Ativafit R8 Foldable Exercise Bike
Best recumbent folding:   XTERRA Fitness FB350 Folding Exercise Bike
Best upright folding:   Marcy Foldable Upright Exercise Bike
Best indoor cycling style exercise bike:   Exerpeutic Bluetooth Indoor Cycling Smart Exercise Bike
Best with an extended weight capacity:   Exerpeutic Gold Heavy Duty Foldable Exercise Bike
Best for comfort:  YOSUDA Indoor Cycling Bike
Best for short riders:   Marcy Exercise Upright Fan Bike
Alongside the rise in popularity of high end stationary bikes from Peloton and Echelon, the overall demand for  stationary bikes has soared.
These high end options might be too expensive for many people who want to enjoy the health benefits of indoor cycling. However, there are some more affordable options.

The benefits of exercise bikes
Why are people choosing to  add an exercise bike  to their home gym?
For those who love to ride, an exercise bike can offer a way to do it without having to worry about time of day or weather. You also won’t have to keep an eye out for cars or pedestrians while you ride!
One systematic review found that indoor cycling can increase aerobic capacity and, when combined with diet changes, can help improve cholesterol levels, contribute to weight loss, and reduce blood pressure ( 1 ).
When handles and arm movement are included, your upper body can also get in on the workout. Many stationary bikes offer various resistance levels, making interval training possible too.

How we chose the best affordable exercise bikes
To help you in your search for an affordable exercise bike, we’ve compiled a list of several types of budget-friendly indoor exercise bikes that offer a wide variety of features.
When deciding which bikes should make the cut, we considered:
Special features.  More affordable exercise bikes may not always have the same features as more expensive models, but we tried to include bikes with features that stood out from the pack.
Type.  We included a variety of exercise bike styles: recumbent, upright, and indoor cycling (where you head is above the handlebars, most similar to Peloton and Echelon bikes).
Price.  We know budgets vary, but we tried to make sure all the bikes on this list cost less than $400.
Customer feedback.  There are some things only those who have actually used a particular exercise bike will know. We know this information matters to you, so we made sure to consider what real consumers were saying.
Vetting.  All the companies and bikes on this list have been vetted by Healthline for their business practices and safety.

Healthline’s picks of the best affordable exercise bikes for 2022
General price ranges with dollar signs ($–$$$) are indicated below. One dollar sign means the product is rather affordable, whereas three dollar signs indicate a higher cost.
Generally, prices range from $150–$400, though this may vary depending on where you shop.
Pricing guide
$  = under $200
$$  = $200–$300
$$$  = over $300
Price:  $$$
Levels of resistance:  16
Display:  yes, color meter display
Built-in classes:  12 preset workouts
Style:  recumbent
Pulse sensor:  yes
This recumbent exercise bike tops the list because of the number of features it offers for the price.
In addition to 16 levels of resistance and 12 preset workouts, the bike has a tablet holder so you can use your favorite fitness app to access even more workouts. It also features a wide seat with a mesh seatback to help keep you cool.
The bike is easy to get on thanks to a step-through style, and you can use the side handle to adjust the seat while you’re sitting in it. It also has a bottle holder, wheels to help move it out of the way, and non-slip pedals with adjustable straps.
16 levels of resistance and 12 preset workouts
includes a tablet holder
breathable mesh seatback to add comfort and support for those who need it
higher price than some other options on our list
some complaints of wiring and belt problems
Price:  $$$
Levels of resistance:  8
Display:  no
Built-in classes:  no
Style:  upright
Pulse sensor:  no
If you’re working or studying from home, this desk is a great way to avoid sitting still for hours on end.
Although it’s otherwise no-frills, it features a built-in desk surface large enough to hold a laptop, notebook, and phone. And thanks to its transport wheels, you can roll it out of the way when you’re not using it.
The bike includes eight resistance levels and is designed so that the seat and desk are easy to adjust. You won’t have a monitor to track your progress, but that way you also won’t be distracted from your work.
includes a desk to work on
easily adjustable seat and desk
has transportation wheels to make it easier to move out of the way between work sessions
may actually cost a bit more than $400, depending on what color you want and where you buy it
battery not included
no monitor to help you track your data
Price:  $
Levels of resistance:  8
Display:  yes, removable 6-function LCD
Built-in classes:  no
Style:  desk pedals
Pulse sensor:  no
These pedals are ideal if you work in an office. They’re heavy enough that they won’t slide around during use, and their low profile/adjustable pedal height allows them to be used with desks as low as 27 inches.
Because it’s important to keep noise down in an office, these pedals use the quietest form of resistance, magnetic resistance, for the eight preset levels.
The LCD monitor displays your strides per minute, distance, calories burned, and time, so you can keep track of your progress while you work.
fits under desks as low as 27 inches
8 magnetic resistance levels
LCD monitor that tracks strides per minute, distance, calories burned, and time
no built-in classes
does not include a seat
individuals with longer legs may find the tops of their legs hitting their desk as they pedal
Price:  $$$
Levels of resistance:  22
Display:  yes, 5-inch high contrast display
Built-in classes:  24 preset workouts
Style:  recumbent
Pulse sensor:  yes
The ProForm 325 stands out for the number of extra features it includes.
This recumbent bike offers 22 levels of resistance and 24 preset workouts. For a cycling-class experience at home, you can connect your phone to the bike’s built-in speaker system. (The bike is iFit-enabled and comes with a 30-day free trial.)
It also features wheels for transport, a fan, a 5-inch display, a drink holder, and an oversized seat with a cushioned backrest. The step-through design makes it easier to get on than more traditional bikes.
To help protect your investment, it comes with a 10-year frame warranty and a 1-year warranty on parts and labor.
includes 22 resistance levels and 24 preset workouts
iFit- and Bluetooth-enabled (30-day iFit membership is included with purchase)
oversized seat with a cushioned backrest for comfort
more expensive than some other options on our list
membership fees required to use iFit ($396/year for Yearly Family Plan, $39/month for a Monthly Family Plan, or $180/year for a Yearly Individual Plan)
Price:  $$$
Levels of resistance:  16
Display:  yes, 5.5-inch LCD
Built-in classes:  13 preset workouts, classes available with tablet and app subscription
Style:  upright
Pulse sensor:  yes
This upright exercise bike stands out for the number of exercise class options it offers.
When paired with a tablet and two app subscriptions (Explore the World and Zwift) that feature more than 1,000 unique classes, this upright bike can provide a similar experience to high end options like Peloton and Echelon.
It’s also Bluetooth-enabled so you can connect the bike to your preferred fitness app to help track your progress.
When deciding whether this bike fits your budget, you’ll want to keep in mind the additional expense of monthly subscriptions ($14.99/month for Zwift and $9.99/month for Explore the World).
If you’re willing to spend a little more money (over $500), Schwinn has a version of this bike called the  170 Upright Exercise Bike  that offers even more exercise class options.
16 levels of resistance
13 preset workouts, plus compatibility with Explore the World and Zwift apps
enhanced Bluetooth connectivity to track your workout data in apps
monthly subscription costs if you chose to use Zwift or Explore the World
must provide your own tablet or smartphone to watch classes
Price:  $
Level of resistance:  8
Display:  yes, LCD
Built-in classes:  no
Style:  recumbent
Pulse sensor:  yes
This bike can be folded in half to save space between workouts. It also has wheels to help you roll it out of the way.
The X-shaped design helps riders feel stable on the bike despite its smaller footprint, and built-in arm resistance bands allow a full-body workout without taking up much additional space.
You can track your heart rate, speed, time, and distance on the LCD monitor. You can also adjust the seat and handlebars for a more comfortable ride.
While it doesn’t have built-in classes, it includes a tablet holder, so you can watch videos or use an app to complete workouts.
folds up and has wheels to move out of the way between workouts
large seat with backrest for comfort
very budget-friendly price tag
no built-in preset classes
designed for riders 5 feet 1 inch to 6 feet 2 inches; won’t work for shorter or taller people
relatively low weight limit of 275 pounds
Price:  $
Levels of resistance:  8
Display:  yes, 2-inch x 1-inch LCD
Built-in classes:  no
Style:  recumbent
Pulse sensor:  yes
Recumbent bikes generally take up more space than upright options, but this highly portable exercise bike from XTERRA Fitness folds into a small size for easy storage and has wheels for easier transport.
Although compact, it features a comfortable padded seat, a pulse sensor, and a pocket for your phone.
Something to consider is that while this bike has a lower price point, it doesn’t offer built-in classes. It also has only a 2-inch x 1-inch LCD window, and the weight capacity maxes out at 225 pounds.
folds for easy storage
includes wheels for easy transport
budget-friendly price point, especially for a recumbent bike
lacks built-in classes
display window is only 2 inches by 1 inch
Price:  $
Level of resistance:  8
Display:  yes, LCD
Built-in classes:  no
Style:  upright
Pulse sensor:  no
If you prefer upright bikes but need something portable and compact, this one is a great choice. The seat height is adjustable to accommodate most statures, and the bike is sturdy despite weighing less than 40 pounds (18 kg).
While this bike has a relatively low price, one thing to keep in mind is that it doesn’t come with a lot of the bells and whistles more expensive options offer. It has no built-in classes or pulse sensors and has only a small LCD window.
8 resistance levels
weighs less than 40 pounds (18 kg) and folds up
has 5 seat height options
no built-in classes
no pulse sensors
has only a small LCD window
Price:  $$
Levels of resistance:  infinite resistance options
Display:  no
Built-in classes:  yes, with tablet and app subscription
Style:  upright
Pulse sensor:  no
Although it doesn’t feature a display of its own, this bike has Bluetooth connectivity and a tablet holder so you can use your own app.
The bike is designed to be used with the MyCloudFitness app, which tracks your workout stats and offers several workout videos and programs.
This particular app has a free version and a premium version, which will cost $14.99/month. (The premium version includes the app’s personal coaching programs and its Scenic World Tour Ride.)
One design feature that’s particularly useful when streaming classes is the ability to stand up and cycle (simulating an uphill climb). Some users say they miss having a pulse sensor, though.
includes a wide tablet holder
workouts can be tracked with the MyCloudFitness app
design allows user to stand up and cycle
no display
lower user weight capacity (only 220 pounds)
uses friction instead of magnetic resistance
Price:  $$
Levels of resistance:  8
Display:  yes, LCD
Built-in classes:  no
Style:  upright
Pulse sensor:  yes
Most stationary bikes have a weight capacity of 250–300 pounds (113–136 kg), so they can’t accommodate people who weigh more than that. However, this one has a weight capacity of 400 pounds (181 kg), as well as a wide seat cushion for larger bodies.
This sturdy bike is also foldable and has wheels for portability. It offers eight levels of resistance and a display that shows calories burned, distance, time, speed, and pulse rate. However, it does not include built-in classes.
weight capacity of 400 pounds (181 kg) and wide seat cushion
foldable with wheels for easier transport
8 resistance levels
no built-in classes
no tablet holder
Price:  $$$
Level of resistance:  infinite resistance adjustments possible
Display:  yes, LCD
Built-in classes:  no
Style:  upright
Pulse sensor:  no
Two-way adjustable handlebars, a padded seat that’s adjustable four ways, and a large range of resistance make exercising on the YOSUDA a more comfortable biking experience.
Additionally, a water bottle holder makes it easy to stay hydrated during a workout, and transport wheels make it easier to move the bike out of the way afterward.
Although this bike does have an iPad holder to allow for streaming your favorite shows and workouts, it’s not as integrated with built-in classes as the other indoor cycling style bike higher up on our list is — the  Exerpeutic Indoor Cycling Smart Exercise Bike . It does not come with a pulse sensor. Its friction resistance will also require more maintenance than magnetic resistance would.
includes iPad holder and water bottle holder
has transport wheels to help move the bike between workouts
designed with adjustable handlebars and four-way adjustable padded seat for comfort
no built-in classes
no pulse sensor
friction instead of magnetic resistance
Price:  $$$
Level of resistance:  air resistance to match pedaling speed
Display:  yes, LCD
Built-in classes:  no
Style:  upright
Pulse sensor:  no
If you’re under 5 feet tall, it can be hard to find an exercise bike that will fit comfortably. This bike can be adjusted to fit someone with a 21-inch inseam. (And for those sharing their bike with a taller individual, it can adjust up to a 33-inch inseam.)
While air resistance is a louder form of resistance, the fan’s cool air can be a welcome comfort for those who tend to work up a sweat during workouts.
The bike includes wheels to make it easier to move out of the way after workouts. It also has an LCD monitor that tracks speed, time, distance, and calories.
While it may not be the best fit for those who love preset exercise programs, it does have handles that will work your arms at the same time as your legs.
can be adjusted to fit someone with a 21-inch inseam
fan offers a cool breeze while working out
moving handles for an upper body workout at the same time
air resistance is louder and can’t be mechanically controlled
batteries are not included
no built-in exercise programs

Comparing affordable exercise bikes

How to choose the best affordable exercise bike
First, to choose your own affordable  exercise bike , you’ll need to know exactly how much you’re willing to spend. All bikes on this list cost less than $400, but several models are right around the $200 mark.
Just be aware that the less expensive bikes will generally have fewer features and may be made with lower quality materials.
Additionally, you’ll want to consider the cost of an app subscription if you want unlimited access to workouts.
Next, choose the style of bike you want — upright, recumbent, or  indoor cycling -style.
Upright bikes keep you in an upright position, while recumbent bikes feature a backrest and keep you in a more reclined position.
Indoor cycling bikes mimic standard outdoor bicycles, so during heavy workouts, you’ll be leaning forward with your head over the handlebars. For reference, both Peloton and Echelon offer indoor cycling bikes.
Finally, there may be other features you’re looking for. To replicate the experience of a high end bike, you’ll want to make sure the one you choose has a tablet holder.
Other important features you may want to look for are drink holders, an extended weight capacity, and the option to fold the bike for storage.

Frequently asked questions
The price tag on an exercise bike won’t always tell you the whole story. An exercise bike may cost less because it’s on sale, has fewer features, comes from a less-known brand, or is made from more easily sourced materials.
Before buying any exercise bike, you’ll want to read customer reviews and think about the features most important to you to help determine whether a particular bike will work for you.
Exercise bikes range greatly in price, from less than $200 to more than $2,000.
The amount you should expect to pay for a quality bike will depend on which features you’re expecting. Bikes under $500 will typically not have large touch screens or as many built-in workout programs, and they may have simpler forms of resistance.
As the cost increases, you can expect the bike to include features such as a swiveling touch screen, more resistance levels, the ability to livestream exercise classes, app storage for your data, and Bluetooth speakers.
Exercise bikes can be expensive because of the cost of materials, the number of features/amount of technology a bike includes, or just the name of the brand on the bike. When choosing a bike, you’ll want to assess whether the reason for its price is worth the cost to you.

The bottom line
With the advent of high end workout bikes from brands like  Peloton , many people have renewed interest in indoor cycling and at-home cycling classes. However, these bikes’ high prices make them an unrealistic purchase for many people.
Fortunately, several styles of stationary bikes are available for $450 or less and offer a variety of features. With one of these affordable exercise bikes, you can reap the health benefits of indoor cycling workouts without breaking your budget.

References:

https://www.healthline.com#overall
https://www.healthline.com#multitasking
https://www.healthline.com#office
https://www.healthline.com#recumbent
https://www.healthline.com#upright
https://www.healthline.com#small-spaces
https://www.healthline.com#folding
https://www.healthline.com#upright-folding
https://www.healthline.com#indoor-cycling
https://www.healthline.com#extended-weight
https://www.healthline.com#comfort
https://www.healthline.com#short
https://www.healthline.com/health/fitness-exercise/stationary-bike-workout
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6722762/
https://www.amazon.com/Schwinn-170-Upright-Bike-MY17/dp/B01MUAOZZ4?th=1
https://www.healthline.com#indoor-cycling
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/best-exercise-bike-for-home
https://www.healthline.com/health/benefits-of-a-spin-class
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/peloton-vs-echelon
