Title: 19 Sugar-Free Starbucks Drinks

Whether you prefer coffees, teas, or blended drinks, Starbucks offers an extensive menu to suit your taste buds.
Unfortunately, many menu options are high in sugar. If you’ve been left scratching your head wondering what to order to cut back on sugar, you’re not alone.
There’s no need to worry, though — the menu features plenty of sugar-free options, allowing you to enjoy a satisfying beverage without ramping up your sugar intake.
Here are 19 sugar-free drinks you can order at Starbucks ( 1 ).

Hot coffee
This simple coffee staple is made by topping espresso with hot water, resulting in a warm, soothing drink that’s sugar-free and high in  caffeine .
One grande Caffè Americano contains just 15 calories, 2 grams of carbs, and 0 grams of sugar.
Espresso is a concentrated type of coffee that provides a good chunk of caffeine in each serving.
Not only is it sugar-free, but a double shot of espresso at Starbucks contains just 10 calories and 2 grams of carbs.
With just 5 calories and 0 grams of carbs and sugar per serving, brewed coffee roasts are a great option for those on a low carb or low sugar diet.
Starbucks offers several varieties, including Blonde, Dark, or Pike Place roasts. Feel free to explore the options to find your favorite.
If you prefer, add a bit of sugar-free sweetener like  Splenda or stevia .
Starbucks’ espresso macchiato is simply an espresso topped with a little steamed milk and foam.
It contains just 15 calories, 2 grams of carbs, and 0 grams of sugar, although this can vary depending on your choice of milk.
Cappuccino is made by adding a thick layer of milk foam to espresso.
The drink doesn’t contain added sugar. Still, a grande cappuccino made with 2% milk provides 12 grams of naturally occurring sugar from the milk.
Thus, it may be a better option for those looking to limit their intake of added sugar rather than those following a low carb or  ketogenic diet .
Made by combining short shots of espresso with steamed whole milk, the flat white is a concentrated coffee drink that’s low in sugar.
Although a tall serving contains 13 grams of sugar from milk, it’s free of added sugars, syrups, and sweeteners.
Starbucks’ Caffè Misto contains equal amounts of brewed coffee and steamed milk.
Similarly to other coffee drinks, it contains 10 grams of sugar from milk but is made without added sugars.
Caffè latte, also sometimes simply referred to as a latte, is made from espresso, steamed milk, and a light layer of foam.
Although many people choose to add sweeteners to their latte, the drink itself is free of added sugar. Still, it contains 18 grams of  milk sugar  in each 16-ounce (473-mL) serving.

Cold coffee
Thanks to its rich, concentrated flavor, cold brew is a popular choice among coffee connoisseurs.
What’s more, it can be a great choice if you’re looking to scale back your sugar intake. There are just 5 calories and 0 grams of carbs and sugar in a grande cold brew.
Customize your cold brew with sugar-free add-ons like stevia, Splenda, or no-sugar vanilla syrup.
Unlike their regular cold brew, Starbucks’  Nitro Cold Brew  is infused with nitrogen, giving it a smooth and creamy texture and flavor.
It’s also a great sugar-free option on their menu, with just 5 calories and 0 grams of carbs and sugar per serving.
You can add extra flavor to your nitro cold brew with a few pumps of your favorite sugar-free syrup, such as cinnamon dolce or vanilla.
Similarly to the regular flat white, the iced flat white is made by pairing shots of espresso with whole milk and ice.
A grande iced flat white contains 11 grams of sugar from milk and is made without sugary syrups, drizzles, or creams.
This refreshing coffee drink combines fresh espresso with milk and ice.
If made with 2% milk, a grande iced caffé latte provides 11 grams of milk sugar. Still, it’s free of added sugars, extra flavors, and toppings.
Iced coffee is a beloved summer staple that’s made by pouring freshly brewed  coffee  over ice.
Although it’s usually made by adding four pumps of classic syrup, you can significantly slash the sugar content by using stevia instead, along with a bit of sugar-free vanilla or cinnamon dolce syrup.

Tea
Chai tea  is a popular variety of black tea. It’s made using a blend of spices, including clove, cardamom, ginger, and cinnamon.
It’s free of carbs, calories, and sugar but contains a little caffeine for a quick energy fix.
Be sure to steer clear of the chai tea latte, which contains a whopping 42 grams of sugar per 16-ounce (473-mL) serving.
The earl grey tea blend features black tea infused with bergamot essence and lavender.
It doesn’t contain any calories, carbs, or sugar and can be enjoyed either hot or cold for a soothing way to start your day on the right foot.
This delicious  green tea  drink from Starbucks is smoky, sweet, and sugar-free.
It’s also free of calories and carbs and contains less caffeine than many other drinks on the menu. This makes it a great option if you’re looking to reduce your sugar and caffeine intake.
This herbal tea is made with an infusion of lemon verbena along with spearmint and peppermint leaves, giving it a refreshing flavor.
In addition to being caffeine-free, it’s free of carbs, calories, and sugar.
This caffeine-free herbal tea is a sweet and tasty sugar-free treat made with candied pineapple, peaches, chamomile blossoms, lemon verbena, apples, and rosehip pieces.
Like other herbal teas, it contains no calories, carbs, or sugar.
If you’re craving a hot, soothing green tea drink, check out the Jade Citrus Mint tea from Starbucks.
It features green tea infused with spearmint, lemon verbena, and  lemongrass , giving it a smooth and citrusy flavor.
It’s free of carbs, calories, and sugar and contains a bit of caffeine in each serving.

The bottom line
Whether you’re after sugar-free coffee, tea, or cold drinks, rest assured that Starbucks offers many suitable options.
Use the list above as a starting point and enjoy these sugar-free drinks in moderation as part of a healthy, well-rounded diet.
Try this today:  Starbucks makes it easy to customize your drinks by selecting extra add-ons, toppings, and flavors. One of my favorite ways to spice up any drink is to add a bit of stevia or a few pumps of sugar-free syrup!

References:

https://www.starbucks.com/menu
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/what-is-caffeine
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/stevia-vs-splenda
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/ketogenic-diet-101
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/sugar-in-milk
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/nitro-coffee
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/top-13-evidence-based-health-benefits-of-coffee
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/chai-tea
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/top-10-evidence-based-health-benefits-of-green-tea
https://www.healthline.com/health/food-nutrition/lemongrass-tea
