Title: Persona Nutrition Vitamins: A Dietitian’s Review

Persona Nutrition is a vitamin subscription company that offers personalized product recommendations based on the results of an online questionnaire.
Boasting an extensive selection of vitamins, minerals, antioxidants, and herbal supplements, Persona Nutrition provides all the tools you need to customize your routine.
Supplements are conveniently packaged in daily envelopes and delivered right to your door.
This article takes an in-depth look at Persona Nutrition, including how it works, how much it costs, and whether you should try it.
Persona Nutrition offers personalized vitamins, which are customized supplements made for you based on the results of a health questionnaire.
As the questionnaire doesn’t replace the guidance of a qualified health professional, it’s important to talk with a healthcare professional before taking any new supplements.
While Persona Nutrition prioritizes quality and performs on-site testing, the company does not disclose the exact amount of each ingredient in its proprietary blends, and its products are not third-party certified for quality and accuracy.

How Persona Nutrition works and how to get started
Persona Nutrition is a  vitamin subscription service  that provides personalized daily supplement packs.
The company uses a simple assessment to collect information about your medical history, diet, exercise regimen, and health goals. It then provides product recommendations tailored to your needs.
You can also customize your monthly subscription by selecting products from the marketplace that meet your specific health concerns.
Each order contains a 28-day supply of supplements, which are divided into individual daily packets for added convenience.
Persona Nutrition also has a team of  nutritionists , including individuals with undergraduate degrees in nutrition and registered dietitians, and provides free consultations for subscribers seeking personalized health advice.

Pros and cons at a glance
online health assessment provides personalized product recommendations
daily vitamin packs may be more convenient than taking multiple supplements individually
wide selection of products
products tested in-house to ensure safety and purity
includes free consultation with nutrition team
supplements not third-party tested or certified
exact amounts of ingredients in proprietary blends not disclosed
online health quiz may not consider all health conditions or medications
may be more expensive than purchasing individual supplements

Persona Nutrition products
Persona Nutrition offers a variety of supplements that you can mix and match to create your own custom daily vitamin packs.
You can filter supplements based on specific health concerns, including  weight loss , inflammation, and brain, digestive, and joint health.
Some examples of products offered are:
calcium citrate
digestive enzymes
fermented ginseng
melatonin
milk thistle
omega-3 fatty acids
prostate support
turmeric
vitamin D
The company also makes Essential Packs, which are daily packs that contain 3–5 supplements specially curated to address specific health concerns, such as pain, sleep, stress,  energy , weight loss, or immunity.
In addition to daily vitamin packs, you can purchase several types of gummies, powders, and bottled supplements, including collagen peptides, immune boosters, and multivitamin gummies for kids and teens.

Ingredient quality
Persona Nutrition works with trusted suppliers to source ingredients that are high quality, safe, and effective.
Products are tested multiple times throughout production and carefully inspected to ensure accuracy and purity.
However, the supplements are not certified by a third-party company.
Apart from certain products that contain proprietary blends, most of Persona Nutrition’s supplements include detailed information on the types and amounts of specific ingredients they contain, along with their nutritional value.
The company also clearly labels products that are  vegan , vegetarian, made without genetically modified organisms (GMOs), or free of common allergens such as peanuts, shellfish, soy, yeast, and dairy.

Effectiveness
Persona Nutrition can be an easy and effective way to increase your intake of certain  vitamins and minerals .
Because the recommendations are catered to your needs, Persona Nutrition can address specific health concerns or issues that are most important to you.
Additionally, the company has a team of experts on its medical advisory board, and it analyzes research to select supplements that are high quality and effective.
The company also provides detailed information on the science-backed benefits of each product in its marketplace, along with a summary of the available research.
Still, keep in mind that some supplements may have more evidence to support their health claims than others, depending on the specific ingredients they contain.
It’s also important to note that the online questionnaire offered by Persona Nutrition shouldn’t be used as a replacement for a comprehensive medical consultation with a healthcare professional.

Pricing
Prices for Persona Nutrition vary depending on the supplements you select, with prices ranging from $0.06–$1.83 per daily serving.
For reference, here are the prices for a 4-week supply of each Essential Pack:
Men’s Ultra:  $54.99
Women’s Ultra:  $67.99
Energy:  $21.99
CBD Stress:  $73.99
Beauty Within:  $66.99
Weight Loss Support:  $40.99
Keep in mind that Persona Nutrition offers discounted rates for your first month, as well as for recurring monthly subscriptions.
There’s also a shipping fee based on your location.

Customer reviews and brand reputation
As of the time of publication, Persona holds a rating of 4.4 out of 5 stars on  TrustPilot , based on 6,936 customer reviews.
Most online reviews from customers are positive, with many noting that the vitamin packs are simple and convenient. Others also report that the customer service team is helpful in resolving issues quickly and making personalized product recommendations.
In less favorable reviews, customers report being dissatisfied with the pricing or packaging of the supplements. Some customers also say the products didn’t work for them or didn’t cause any noticeable health benefits.
Persona is not currently accredited by the  Better Business Bureau .
However, they currently hold an A- rating, which is based on factors like the company’s complaint history, how long they’ve been operating, their business practices, and whether there are any licensing or government actions against them.
Since 2021, Persona Nutrition has also been  involved  in a lawsuit with Persona Cosmetics regarding trademark infringement, which is still pending.

Comparison with competitors
In addition to Persona Nutrition, several other subscription-based supplement services are available.
For example,  Care/of  is a supplement delivery company that specializes in vitamins, minerals, herbs, and  probiotics  intended to boost your health.
Like Persona Nutrition, Care/of encourages customers to take a simple assessment on its website to collect information and provide personalized product recommendations.
However, in addition to daily vitamin packs, Care/of offers a line of bottled supplements that is available at Target.
Ritual  is another subscription service that delivers monthly packs of multivitamins directly to your door.
Unlike Persona Nutrition, Ritual doesn’t provide personalized recommendations. Instead, the service offers  multivitamins specifically for men ,  women , and children of all ages.
Compared with similar companies, Ritual tends to be more transparent about its ingredient sourcing.
Certain products that Ritual offers are also verified by USP, a third-party organization that tests supplements for quality, purity, and potency.

Who is Persona Nutrition for?
As Persona Nutrition provides personalized recommendations based on your needs, it can be a good option for those who are looking to revamp their supplement routine but unsure about what to buy.
With monthly subscriptions and daily vitamin packs, it can be a convenient and easy alternative to purchasing supplements individually.
Persona Nutrition also provides free consultations from nutritionists, making it a good choice if you’d like more detailed health advice.
However, although Persona Nutrition tests and inspects all products thoroughly, the products are not currently certified by a third-party organization like USP or NSF International.
Additionally, a Certificate of Analysis (CoA) is not available for any of the company’s supplements. This document ensures that products meet the required specifications.
Generally, when  shopping for supplements , these are important factors to look for to ensure that you’re getting the highest quality products possible.
Finally, remember to talk to your doctor before adding supplements to your routine, as some products could interact with medications and may not be suitable for those with certain health conditions.

Frequently asked questions about Persona Nutrition
Both Persona Nutrition and Care/of use an online health assessment to curate a daily supplement routine tailored to your needs.
However, Persona Nutrition offers a wider selection of products and includes free consultation with their team of nutritionists, which may be an important consideration for some.
On the other hand, Care/of provides more detailed information about the sourcing of all ingredients they use, as well as the research behind each formulation.
Some Care/of products can also be purchased individually at Target, which may be preferable for those who don’t want to commit to a monthly subscription.
Be sure to look for a brand that offers products to fit your health goals, dietary restrictions, and budget. If possible, opt for brands that test their products to ensure safety, strength, and quality and are certified by a third-party organization such as NSF International or USP.
Additionally, consider whether you prefer buying supplements individually or using a subscription-based service such as Persona. While subscription services can be more convenient, some may also be more expensive.
Because the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) does not regulate supplements in the same way as medications, products from Persona Nutrition are not FDA-approved.
However, all supplements from Persona Nutrition are manufactured in a facility that adheres to Current Good Manufacturing Practices established by the FDA to help ensure safety.

The bottom line
Persona Nutrition offers convenient subscription plans with daily vitamin packs curated just for you.
With a variety of supplements to choose from, it can be a great way to enhance your health and ensure that you’re meeting your nutritional needs.
It could also be a good option if you’re just getting started with supplements and seeking individualized product recommendations tailored to you.
Still, make sure to talk with a healthcare professional before placing your order.

References:

https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/personalized-vitamins
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/dietitian-vs-nutritionist
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/12-weight-loss-pills-reviewed
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/ginseng-benefits
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/best-supplements-for-energy
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/7-supplements-for-vegans
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/micronutrients
https://www.trustpilot.com/review/personanutrition.com
https://www.bbb.org/us/wa/snoqualmie/profile/vitamins-and-supplements/persona-1296-1000067502
https://www.law.com/radar/card/persona-cosmetics-inc-v-societe-des-produits-nestle-sa-et-al-40535111-0/
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/care-of-vitamins
https://www.healthline.com/health/yeast-infection-probiotics
https://www.healthline.com/health/ritual-vitamins
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/best-multivitamins-for-men
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/multivitamins-womens-health
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/how-to-choose-high-quality-vitamins-and-supplements
