Title: Sprinly Review: A Healthy Splurge

For health-conscious eaters, Sprinly’s super fresh, plant-based, gluten-free meals may be well worth the price.

Healthline meal delivery score: 3.6 out of 5
When you’re following a plant-based diet, meal prep can be time consuming. Between trying to meet your nutrient needs and the lengthy cook times for things like grains and beans, it’s not always possible to whip up a quick and nutritious meal at home.
Sprinly aims to change that. Offering a range of flavorful and healthy vegan meals delivered weekly to your door, this nutrition-first service may be a game-changer for your weekly meal planning.
We tried Sprinly for 1 week to see how it works, who it may be a good fit for, and whether or not it’s worth the price tag.
Our tester scored Sprinly across 9 categories, allotting points from 0–5. The scores reflect the average rating for each category.
Overall:  3.6
Sign-up, delivery, and cancellation:  3
Meal variety:  2
Nutrition:  4.5
Sustainability:  4
Ingredient quality and freshness:  5
Ease of preparation:  5
Taste:  4
Affordability:  1
Learn more about  how we test meal kits .
provides nutritious, flavorful plant-based meals
one of the freshest-tasting prepared meal delivery services available
all meals free of refined sugars and artificial preservatives
items are prepared in gluten-free facilities
option to mix and match meals from the weekly menu
uses mostly organic ingredients
packaging is fully recyclable, compostable, or reusable
available throughout continental United States
offers only six menu options to choose from each week
relatively expensive at $16–$18 per serving
no options for larger serving sizes or multiple portions
might not be suitable for those with severe food allergies due to risk of cross-contamination

What is Sprinly?
Sprinly is a  plant-based meal delivery service  that launched in 2016. It provides nutritious, ready-to-eat vegan and gluten-free prepared entrees. Some entrees require heating; others, like the Citrus Detox Salad, arrive fresh and ready to eat.
The service offers plans with 6, 12, or 18 single-serving meals per week, and you can pause, cancel, or change your plan at any time. You can also select your meals from the company’s rotating menu to create a custom meal plan, which includes six unique options each week.
Sprinly uses nutrient-dense, mostly organic ingredients in its meals, along with a variety of herbs, spices, and seasonings for extra flavor.
Additionally, the service takes a nutrition-first approach by minimizing the oil and sodium content of meals and eliminating any refined sugars or artificial preservatives.

How it works
Here is a closer look at how Sprinly works and how to get started.
From the Sprinly website, you choose your plan and input your email, shipping address, payment information, and billing address. When you’re ready to place your first order, you can pick which week you’d like to schedule your first delivery.
Unlike other meal delivery services, Sprinly doesn’t offer different dietary menus or options for various numbers of servings per meal. Instead, the plans include 6, 12, or 18 single-serving meals per week.
You can pause your plan, skip delivery, or cancel your subscription anytime without fees.
Once your account is created, you choose your meals from the full menu to build your delivery box. Sprinly makes it easy to create your own custom meal plan by choosing your favorite plant-based meals from the company’s rotating weekly menu.
Customers should choose their meals by 11:59 p.m. ET on Tuesday to receive their order the following week.
Deliveries occur on Tuesday or Wednesday each week, with meals packed fresh in insulated boxes kept cold with ice packs.
Sprinly recommends eating the meals within 5-6 days of delivery; meals that should be eaten earliest are labeled.
Meals that are meant to be heated include microwave and stovetop instruction. Others, like salads, are enjoyed fresh.

The food
All Sprinly meals are vegan, gluten-free, and free of  refined sugars  and added preservatives. They come fully prepared and ready to heat, If applicable, and enjoy.
Each week the service offers a new menu with six plant-based dishes, each of which features a variety of nutritious ingredients. Sprinly also allows you to select your favorite items to build a weekly menu based on your food preferences.
Here are a few of the available meals:
Peanut Soba Noodles with Tofu and Broccoli
Enchilada Casserole with “Queso” and a Chipotle Salad
Vegetable Tikka Masala with Roasted Cauliflower and Rice
Smoked Sweet Potato Tacos with Red Pepper Salsa and Lime Crema
Coconut Kale Antioxidant Salad
Items that are spicy or free of soy, oil, or nuts are labeled as such on the menu. Meals also list ingredients and nutritional content so you can find options that work for you.
All Sprinly meals are vegan and free of refined sugars and artificial preservatives, and most of the ingredients are certified organic.
Items range in terms of their nutritional value, with most providing 300–650 calories per serving.
Sprinly also makes its meals in gluten-free facilities. That means it’s a great option for those with celiac disease or  non-celiac gluten sensitivity .
However, options may be limited for some dietary restrictions, including  keto , low carb, and paleo diets.
And while Sprinly provides detailed information on the ingredients in each item on the menu, the meals are not prepared in an allergen-free facility. Therefore, it may not be suitable for those with severe food allergies aside from gluten.

How much does Sprinly cost?
Sprinly offers a few weekly plans, which vary in price:
6 meals:  $109 per week ($18.17 per meal)
12 meals:  $199 per week ($16.58 per meal)
18 meals:  $289 per week ($16.06 per meal)
Shipping fees, which depend on your location, are calculated at checkout.

We tried it!
Healthline nutrition editor  Kelli McGrane , MS, RD, tried Sprinly for 1 week. Though she was skeptical of the more expensive price compared with other meal delivery services, she was impressed by the freshness and flavor of most dishes she received.
She sampled six items from the weekly menu, including:
Sesame-Crusted Tofu with Peppers and Garlic Forbidden Rice
Vegetable Tikka Masala with Roasted Cauliflower and Rice
All-Day Sunshine Quinoa Bowl with Lemon Vinaigrette
Mushroom and Lentil Sliders with Herbs de Provence Home Fries
Pesto Pasta with Sun-Dried Tomato Cakes
Brunch Frittata with Walnut and Strawberry Vinaigrette Salad
“Sprinly is by far the freshest-tasting prepared meal delivery service I’ve tried yet. All the meals were bursting with crunchy vegetables and chewy whole grains.”
— Healthline Nutrition Editor Kelli McGrane, MS, RD
Here’s what else Kelli had to say about her experience with Sprinly:
Meal selection:  “While there were only six meal options, I was impressed by the wide range of vegetables,  plant-based proteins , grains, herbs, spices, and seasonings provided.”
Delivery:  The meals arrived in good condition. Sprinly stands out from competitors because it uses packaging materials that are 100% recyclable, reusable, or compostable. Plus, all meals were clearly labeled with the name of the dish, ingredients, and relevant dietary icons.
Ingredient quality:  One of the things that Kelli liked most about Sprinly was the freshness and quality of the ingredients used. “All my meals tasted incredibly fresh — even the salad greens were vibrant and not at all soggy or wilted.”
Taste:  “Sprinly is by far the freshest-tasting prepared meal delivery service I’ve tried yet,” she says. “All the meals were bursting with crunchy vegetables and chewy whole grains. In fact, the meals reminded me of entrees from Sweetgreen and Whole Foods.”
The entrees were all lightly seasoned and accompanied by flavorful sauces that helped elevate their flavor profile. In particular, Kelli loved the pineapple sauce paired with the Sesame-Crusted Tofu, the lemon vinaigrette with the All-Day Sunshine Quinoa Bowl, and the pesto in the Pesto Pasta.
“The only meal I didn’t love was the Mushroom and Lentil Sliders. The sliders were too dry and needed additional condiments or toppings. Additionally, while I enjoyed the flavors and textures of the All-Day Sunshine Quinoa Bowl, I ended up adding leftover baked  tofu  from my fridge to help make the dish a bit more filling.”

Is Sprinly worth it?
As mentioned above, Sprinly’s meals are incredibly fresh and made with high quality ingredients. But with plans costing $16–$18 per serving, it’s more expensive than cooking your own meals at home, so it may not be ideal for  budget-conscious consumers . It’s also more expensive than some other plant-based meal delivery services.
However, some people may find that the convenience factor and the ingredient quality make it worth the price — especially if already regularly dine out or grab lunch to go.
Still, keep in mind that the company offers fewer menu selections than many similar services and doesn’t provide options tailored to some popular dietary patterns. It may not be a good choice if you have severe food allergies, or have certain dietary restrictions, including if you’re following a ketogenic or  paleo diet .

How it compares
Sprinly provides healthy prepared vegan meals, but it isn’t the only service doing this. Daily Harvest, Mosaic Foods, Purple Carrot, and Thistle also offer  plant-based meal delivery . Here’s a quick look at how Sprinly compares.

Frequently asked questions

With an average cost of $16.58 per serving, Sprinly is one of the pricier plant-based meal delivery services on the market.

The company says that its focus on freshness, coupled with an organic-whenever-possible ingredient philosophy, makes the service at times more expensive than competitors. (Think Whole Foods versus Kroger.) Purchasing more meals per week can help lower the average cost to $16.05 per serving.

With an average cost of $16.58 per serving, Sprinly is one of the pricier plant-based meal delivery services on the market.

The company says that its focus on freshness, coupled with an organic-whenever-possible ingredient philosophy, makes the service at times more expensive than competitors. (Think Whole Foods versus Kroger.) Purchasing more meals per week can help lower the average cost to $16.05 per serving.
Yes. Sprinly meals are very healthy. The service prioritizes plant-based, nutrient-dense foods and are free of artificial preservatives and refined sugar. Meals also feature plenty of fresh fruits and veggies, along with high quality, organic ingredients.
Yes. Sprinly meals are very healthy. The service prioritizes plant-based, nutrient-dense foods and are free of artificial preservatives and refined sugar. Meals also feature plenty of fresh fruits and veggies, along with high quality, organic ingredients.
Sprinly is based in Valley View, Ohio, and offers delivery throughout the contiguous United States.
Sprinly is based in Valley View, Ohio, and offers delivery throughout the contiguous United States.

The bottom line
Sprinly is a plant-based meal delivery service that specializes in providing vegan entrees that are fresh, flavorful, and fully prepared.
Although some people may find it relatively expensive, Sprinly uses high quality, mostly organic ingredients, and all the service’s meals are free of gluten, refined sugars, and artificial preservatives.
However, Sprinly has a smaller menu than many competitors and doesn’t offer varying serving sizes, so it may not be a good fit for everyone.

References:

https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/how-we-test-meal-kits
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/plant-based-meal-delivery
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/refined-sugar
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/signs-you-are-gluten-intolerant
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/keto-meal-delivery
https://www.healthline.com/authors/kelli-mcgrane
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/protein-for-vegans-vegetarians
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/what-is-tofu
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/lower-grocery-bill-inflation
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/paleo-diet-meal-plan-and-menu
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/plant-based-meal-delivery
