Title: 10 Best Water Bottles to Meet Your Hydration Goals

Keeping a reusable water bottle on hand is a great way to ensure that you’re drinking enough water throughout the day.
In addition to being portable and convenient, reusable water bottles are an environmentally friendly alternative to single-use plastic bottles.
However, with so many different types on the market, it can be tricky to find one that fits your needs and preferences.
Here are our picks of the 10 best water bottles, plus tips on deciding which one is right for you.

A quick look at the best reusable water bottles
Best overall:   Stanley The Quencher H2.0 Flowstate Tumbler
Best large capacity:   Fidus 64 oz Motivational Water Bottle
Best lightweight:   Hydro Flask Lightweight Wide Mouth Trail Series
Best with a straw:   Simple Modern Classic Tumbler
Best affordable:   Nalgene 32 oz Wide Mouth Bottle
Best with a built-in straw:   Owala FreeSip
Best insulated:   Hydro Flask Wide Mouth
Best for running:   Nathan ExoShot 2.0
Best versatile:   Takeya Actives Insulated Water Bottle with Spout Lid
Best for kids:   YETI Rambler Jr. 12 oz Kids Water Bottle

Benefits of a reusable water bottle
Reusable water bottles can be a convenient and easy way to  increase your water intake .
They typically hold more water than regular cups and glasses, so you don’t need to worry about heading back to the kitchen for a refill as often. Plus, they’re portable, making it easier to stay hydrated almost anywhere.
Additionally, they’re often insulated to maintain the temperature of your drink and may feature straw, spout, or flip-top lids to prevent leaks and spills.
Reusable water bottles are a much more affordable and eco-friendly alternative to single-use plastic water bottles, which are a major contributor to  plastic waste  and often end up in landfills ( 1 ).
Furthermore, single-use plastic water bottles typically contain larger amounts of compounds such as microplastics and bisphenol A (BPA), which are associated with negative health effects ( 2 ,  3 ).

How we chose
Here are a few of the key factors we considered when choosing the best water bottles:
Features:  We selected water bottles with a variety of features and lid types that may make it easier to meet your hydration goals.
Capacity:  Many of the water bottles we selected are available in a wide range of sizes, so you’ll likely be able to find one that fits your needs.
Materials:  We picked water bottles made with safe, high quality, and durable materials for long-term use.
Recommendations:  We asked Healthline editors and contributors for their top water bottle recommendations.
Customer reviews:  We chose water bottles with mostly positive online reviews from customers.
Price:  We selected water bottles at a variety of price points to help you find one that fits your budget.
General price ranges with dollar signs ($–$$$) are indicated below. One dollar sign means the product is rather affordable, whereas three dollar signs indicate a higher cost.
Generally, prices range from $15.99 to $65, though this may vary depending on where you shop. Prices may also vary for products that are available in multiple sizes.
$  = under $20
$$  = $20–$50
$$$  = over $50

Healthline’s picks of the best reusable water bottles
Price:  $$
Size:  40 ounces (oz) (1,183 milliliters [mL]) or 30 oz (887 mL)
Lid type:  rotating cover with 3 positions: straw opening, drink opening, and full-cover top
Material:  stainless steel
How to clean:  dishwasher-safe
Known for its durability, quality, and convenience, The Quencher H2.0 Flowstate Tumbler from Stanley is our pick for the best overall water bottle to help you stay hydrated.
It’s equipped with double-wall vacuum insulation, which the company claims can maintain the temperature of cold liquids for up to 11 hours, hot liquids for up to 7 hours, and iced drinks for up to 2 days.
It also has an ergonomic comfort-grip handle and a narrow base that’s compatible with most cupholders.
Additionally, it includes a rotating cover, which can be used with a straw, as a drink opening, or as a full-cover top.
“This straw cup has quite a fan base, and for good reason. I find I drink more with a straw, and between the straw and the size, I have no trouble staying hydrated.
“While it’s not quite a true water bottle (you can’t throw it in your bag and run out the door), that’s actually one of the things I like about it — you feel like you’re drinking out of a cup. I love the handle, and they recently redesigned and improved The Quencher to have a better handle and lid.”
— Healthline Senior Editor Lisa Valente, MS, RD
dishwasher-safe
double-wall vacuum insulation
keeps drinks cold for up to 11 hours and iced drinks cold for up to 2 days
comfortable grip
compatible with most cupholders
can be used with or without a straw
available in multiple colors
splash- and spill-proof
may scratch and dent easily, according to reviewers
not ideal for sports since it does not have a sport top or a strap
Price:  $$
Size:  64 oz (1,893 mL)
Lid type:  straw lid
Material:  plastic
How to clean:  handwash only
This water bottle from Fidus may be a good choice if you prefer a product with a higher capacity to help you meet your hydration goals.
It can hold up to 64 oz (1,893 mL) of water and is labeled with time markers to help you keep tabs on your progress.
Additionally, this water bottle is made with BPA-free plastic and has a wide-mouth design so you can easily upgrade your drink with ice cubes or fruit.
“I use this water bottle regularly to help stay hydrated during the day. I like that it’s large enough that I don’t need to refill it often and that it features a removable straw and detachable handle for portability.”
— Healthline writer Rachael Link, MS, RD
spill-proof design
removable straw
BPA-free plastic
wide-mouth design that makes it easy to add ice or fruit
detachable paracord handle for easy carrying
available in multiple colors
does not fit in most cupholders
not condensation-proof
handwash only
Price:  $$
Size:  21 oz (621 mL), 24 oz (710 mL), 32 oz (946 mL)
Lid type:  cap
Material:  stainless steel
How to clean:  dishwasher-safe
According to Hydro Flask, the new Lightweight Wide Mouth Trail Series bottles are 25% lighter than the brand’s other water bottles, so they’re great options for  hiking , backpacking, or commuting.
These bottles are made from professional-grade stainless steel, which is thinner to help keep them light while maintaining durability and strength.
They also have double-wall vacuum insulation to maintain the temperatures of your favorite drinks.
This bottle comes with a flex cap, which should be removed for drinking, but it’s compatible with several other Hydro Flask accessories, including a flip lid and wide-mouth straw lid.
dishwasher-safe
double-wall vacuum insulation
compatible with other Hydro Flask lids
durable, professional-grade stainless steel
leakproof design
does not sweat
lighter than other Hydro Flask models
limited color options
Price:  $–$$
Size:  12 oz (355 mL), 16 oz (473 mL), 20 oz (591 mL), 24 oz (710 mL), 28 oz (828 mL), 32 oz (946 mL)
Lid type:  flip lid and straw lid
Material:  stainless steel
How to clean:  handwash tumbler after each use; lid and straw are dishwasher-safe
This tumbler from Simple Modern includes both a leakproof flip lid and a splash-proof straw lid, which you can easily swap out depending on your drink.
The tumbler is much slimmer than many other water bottles, meaning that it can easily fit into narrow cupholders when you’re on the go.
Plus, it’s made from premium stainless steel and available in 29 unique colors.
“I’ve tried countless water bottles, and this tumbler from Simple Modern is by far my favorite. In addition to keeping my water (and other iced beverages) cold for hours, it’s easy to clean and doesn’t sweat.”
— Healthline Nutrition Market Editor Kelli McGrane, MS, RD
dishwasher-safe lids and straws
available in multiple sizes, colors, and patterns
leakproof lid and splash-proof straw lid
fits in most cupholders
double-walled vacuum insulation
does not sweat
affordable
handwashing required for tumbler
may not keep drinks cold for as long as advertised, according to some reviewers
not ideal for sports since it does not have a sport top or a strap
Price:  $
Size:  32 oz (946 mL)
Lid type:  wide mouth
Material:  Tritan plastic
How to clean:  dishwasher-safe
This heavy-duty water bottle from Nalgene is an affordable and sustainable way to stay hydrated.
It’s also Healthline Editor Candice Abellon’s pick for anyone who is rough on their belongings and looking for a durable option that can withstand regular wear and tear.
This bottle features a wide-mouth lid and is dishwasher-safe for added convenience. What’s more, it’s made from recycled materials, including Tritan, a type of BPA-free plastic.
“I have a couple Nalgene wide-mouth bottles that are my go-to for hiking and camping. I usually use it for  electrolyte drink mixes  so that I can keep a separate container for just water. The other thing this bottle is used for? Filled with warm water, it works great as a hot water bottle.”
— Healthline Editor Candice Abellon
dishwasher-safe
durable, BPA-free plastic
made from recycled materials
affordable
wide mouth that makes it easy to add ice or fruit
leakproof
lightweight
strap for easy transport
compatible with other Nalgene lids
does not fit in most cupholders
sweats
some reports that the wide mouth is difficult to drink from
Price:  $$
Size:  19 oz (562 mL), 24 oz (710 mL), 25 oz (739 mL), 32 oz (946 mL), 40 oz (1,183 mL)
Lid type:  flip-top lid
Material:  stainless steel or Tritan plastic
How to clean:  handwash bottle; lid is dishwasher-safe
The Owala FreeSip features the company’s signature FreeSip spout, which allows you to drink in two ways: You can either hold it upright to sip through the built-in straw or tilt it back to use the wide-mouth opening.
You can push the button on the flip-top lid to lock it when it’s not in use, which can help prevent spills and leaks.
Plus, this water bottle is triple-layered and vacuum-insulated to keep drinks cold for up to 24 hours.
“Owala FreeSip is  actually  leakproof in bags, and it is easy to drink in the car.”
— Healthline Senior Editor Lisa Valente, MS, RD
dishwasher-safe lid
available in multiple sizes and colors
2-in-1 lid design with built-in-straw
leakproof design
triple-layered and vacuum-insulated
smaller sizes fit in most cupholders
carry loop for easy transport
does not sweat
bottle is handwash only
may not fit in standard cupholders, depending on the bottle’s size
some reports that the bottle leaks when filled to the top
Price:  $$–$$$
Size:  20 oz (591 mL), 32 oz (946 mL), 40 oz (1,183 mL), 64 oz (1,893 mL)
Lid type:  wide mouth, flex cap, or straw lid
Material:  stainless steel
How to clean:  dishwasher-safe
If you’re looking for a durable bottle that can keep liquids cold when you’re on the go, the Hydro Flask Wide Mouth is definitely worth considering.
This bottle is made with professional-grade stainless steel and features double-wall vacuum insulation to keep drinks hot or cold throughout the day.
It’s available in a variety of colors and sizes and is dishwasher-safe for easy cleaning.
“I’m obsessed with this water bottle and take it everywhere. I’ve had other insulated bottles that didn’t truly keep liquids cold, but this one absolutely does.”
— Healthline Senior Editor Chelsea Logan
dishwasher-safe
double-wall vacuum insulation
wide mouth that makes it easy to add ice or fruit
professional-grade steel to help prevent lingering odors or flavors
compatible with other Hydro Flask lids
carry strap for easy transport
available in multiple colors and sizes
may dent easily, according to some reviewers
most sizes do not fit standard cupholders
a bit pricier than others on our list
Price:  $$
Size:  14 oz (414 mL) or 18 oz (532 mL)
Lid type:  bite valve
Material:  BPA-free plastic
How to clean:  handwash only
Designed for both comfort and efficiency, this handheld bottle is ideal for  running , hiking, cycling, and other outdoor activities.
It features a BPA-free soft flask and a bite valve for hydration on the go.
It also has an ergonomically designed hand strap and small stash pockets to store your credit cards or keys when you’re on a run.
For extra convenience, the flask is collapsible, so you can roll it up and store it in your pocket once it’s empty.
BPA-free plastic
comfortable hand strap
stash pockets for keys and credit cards
collapsible for easy storage
lightweight
limited color options
handwash only
Price:  $$–$$$
Size:  18 oz (532 mL), 22 oz (651 mL), 24 oz (710 mL), 32 oz (946 mL), 40 oz (1,183 mL), 64 oz (1,893 mL)
Lid type:  spout lid
Material:  stainless steel
How to clean:  dishwasher-safe
This water bottle from Takeya is simple but versatile. It has a spout lid that you can lock to prevent leaks or remove to reveal the wide-mouth opening.
Alternatively, you can use the straw lid, or you can buy both lids and swap them out as needed.
The Takeya Actives Insulated Water Bottle is cupholder-friendly, depending on the size, and offers vacuum insulation with a double-wall design to keep drinks cool and prevent sweating.
What’s more, it’s available in a wide range of sizes and colors so you’ll likely be able to find an option that fits your needs and preferences.
dishwasher-safe
compatible with straw lid attachment
smaller sizes fit in most cup holders
does not sweat
leakproof design
removable protective bumper
powder coated for better grip
double-wall insulation
lifetime warranty
larger sizes do not fit most cupholders
a bit pricier than many others on our list
Price:  $$
Size:  12 oz (355 mL)
Lid type:  straw cap
Material:  stainless steel
How to clean:  dishwasher-safe
Yeti now offers a kid-friendly version of its popular Rambler water bottle to help keep your  little ones hydrated  during the day.
Much like the classic Rambler bottle, the Rambler Jr. is made with durable stainless steel and double-wall vacuum insulation to keep drinks cold.
It also has a leak-resistant straw cap to prevent spills and messes and is resistant to rust and punctures.
dishwasher-safe
double-wall vacuum insulation
leak-resistant when closed
built-in straw
durable design
available in several bright colors
does not sweat
some reports that the silicone under the straw mouthpiece is difficult to keep clean with long-term use
more expensive than many other kids’ water bottles

A comparison of the best water bottles
Here is a closer look at how each of our picks compares:

How to choose
You may want to consider the following factors when determining which water bottle is right for you:
Purpose:  Consider how you plan to use your water bottle, since some are designed for specific purposes. For example, a tumbler or wide-mouth bottle can be used for hydration at home or on the go. However, if you’re a runner, you may want to choose a handheld bottle that’s easier to carry.
Size:  In addition to determining the ideal capacity for your water bottle, think about whether you need a bottle with a narrow base to fit in specific areas, such as a cupholder in your car, bike, or stroller.
Lid type:  Some people may prefer sipping from a straw, while others may decide that a spout lid, bite valve, or flip lid works better for them.
Material:  It’s important to decide what type of material you prefer. Water bottles made from  BPA-free plastic , such as Tritan plastic, are often lightweight and more affordable. Stainless steel is usually slightly more expensive but more durable.
Cleaning:  Though some water bottles are dishwasher-safe, many need to be washed by hand. This can be an important consideration if you’re short on time or prefer a product that requires less maintenance.
Budget:  Water bottles are available at a wide range of price points, so be sure to determine how much you’re comfortable spending.

Water bottle maintenance
The easiest way to maintain your reusable water is to clean it, rinse it out, and let it air dry completely after each use.
Cleaning it infrequently, storing it in wet areas, or keeping it sealed for long periods of time with liquid inside can cause unpleasant changes in taste or smell.
A bottle brush is a great item to keep on hand for regular cleaning, especially if you have a water bottle with a narrower opening that can be tricky to clean.
Many companies even offer kits, which contain brushes designed to clean tough-to-reach corners and crevices of your bottle. You can simply scrub with hot water and unscented soap and then let the bottle air dry overnight.
Some bottles can be washed in the dishwasher. You can check with the manufacturer or look for a square icon with a fork and cup on your bottle, which usually indicates that a product is dishwasher-safe.
You can also purchase a pack of bottle cleaning tablets to remove stains and odors and give your bottle a monthly refresh. In most cases, these tablets should be added to the bottle with water and can sit for an hour or so to clean your bottle with no scrubbing required.
Camelbak Bottle Brush Kit
Bottle Bright Cleaning Tablets
Better Life Unscented Dish Soap

How much water do you need?
Water needs  vary based on many factors, including your age, sex, and health status ( 4 ).
Recommendations for fluid intake from health authorities such as the Institute of Medicine and the European Food Safety Authority are as follows ( 5 ):
Adult females:  68–91 oz (2–2.7 liters [L]) per day
Adult males:  85–125 oz (2.5–3.7 L) per day
However, several factors can increase the amount of water your body needs, such as ( 4 ):
hot climates
increased physical activity
a fever or other illness
fluid loss due to diarrhea or vomiting
Listening to your body, drinking water when you feel thirsty, and maintaining a healthy, well-rounded diet can help you ensure that you’re meeting your fluid needs.

Frequently asked questions
Stainless steel and glass are often considered the safest materials for reusable water bottles because they are free of BPA, a harmful compound that has been linked to a variety of negative health effects ( 6 ).
Reusable water bottles are more affordable and environmentally friendly than  single-use plastic water bottles . They can also help keep drinks cold or hot and can be a portable and convenient option for traveling or exercising ( 1 ).
The general recommendation is to wash your water bottle daily and let it air dry. This can help prevent unpleasant changes in taste or smell over time. You can also use a bottle brush or bottle cleaning tablets to keep your bottles clean and help remove any germs or residue.
You can leave water in a reusable bottle for several days before you’ll notice any changes in taste or palatability.
However, leaving water uncovered can increase the risk of contamination with dust or germs. Additionally, leaving liquids in your reusable water for long periods can lead to unpleasant tastes or odors over time.

The bottom line
Reusable water bottles offer a simple and sustainable way to meet your hydration goals each day.
There are plenty of products available, which are made with various materials and equipped with different types of lids and other features.
You can use the products above as a starting point. Be sure to consider your needs, budget, and personal preferences when determining which one is right for you.

References:

https://www.healthline.com#overall
https://www.healthline.com#large-capacity
https://www.healthline.com#lightweight
https://www.healthline.com#straw
https://www.healthline.com#affordable
https://www.healthline.com#built-in-straw
https://www.healthline.com#insulated
https://www.healthline.com#running
https://www.healthline.com#versatile
https://www.healthline.com#kids
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/how-to-drink-more-water
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/5-helpful-tips-to-reduce-your-plastic-use
https://www.healthline.comhttps://case.edu/sustainability/news/making-switch-reusable-bottles
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9103198/
https://www.healthline.comhttps://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35565103/
https://www.healthline.com/health/exercise-fitness/hiking-brain-benefits
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/electrolytes-drinks
https://www.healthline.com/health/exercise-fitness/running-motivation
https://www.healthline.com/health/childrens-health/how-much-water-should-a-toddler-drink
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/what-is-bpa
https://www.amazon.com/dp/B0091SPVSI?tag=healthline-subtag-20
https://www.amazon.com/dp/B07HJQY1H3?tag=healthline-subtag-20
https://www.amazon.com/dp/B007S0PLEK?tag=healthline-subtag-20
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/how-much-water-should-you-drink-per-day
https://www.cdc.gov/healthyweight/healthy_eating/water-and-healthier-drinks.html
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6356561/
https://www.cdc.gov/healthyweight/healthy_eating/water-and-healthier-drinks.html
https://www.niehs.nih.gov/health/topics/agents/sya-bpa/index.cfm
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/tap-water-vs-bottled-water
https://www.healthline.comhttps://case.edu/sustainability/news/making-switch-reusable-bottles
