Title: Finally, a Convenient Coffee Option That Tastes Delicious: Cometeer Coffee Review 2024

From fancy pour-over devices to tried-and-true coffee makers, there’s no shortage of ways to brew a cup of coffee.
If you’re short on time, you’ve likely tried pod-based coffee machines. And while these machines are certainly convenient, they’re not necessarily known for their coffee quality.
Named one of Time Magazine’s Best Inventions of 2022, Cometeer stands out from other pod- or capsule-based coffee companies thanks to its patented method and use of high quality beans from top-notch roasters ( 1 ).
As a self-proclaimed coffee snob — and someone who strongly dislikes pod-based coffee — I set out to see whether Cometeer lives up to the hype.

What is Cometeer?
Cometeer was co-founded by current CEO Matthew Roberts in 2015.
Working with a group of chemists and coffee professionals, Cometeer developed a new brewing method that produces  coffee  10 times stronger than a standard cup.
The coffee is then flash-frozen using liquid nitrogen to lock in peak flavor and packaged into convenient capsules that you can store in your freezer for up to 24 months.
Cometeer partners with renowned roasters from across the world and offers a variety of light, medium, and dark roasts, as well as decaf options.
Cometeer is a subscription service. Customers can choose to receive shipments every 1, 2, or 4 weeks. They can also choose the types of roasts they’d like to receive.
Finally, Cometeer emphasizes a commitment to sustainability by using fully recyclable materials and sending all  spent grinds  to a local composting company.

Pros and cons at a glance
smooth, flavorful brews
hot and iced coffee brewing options
quick and easy to make
coffee sourced from renowned roasters
24-month shelf life in the freezer
convenient subscription model with multiple frequency options
multiple subscription box options
doesn’t require purchasing a special machine (but is compatible with K-cup machines)
more expensive than buying coffee beans
additional shipping fee
doesn’t allow you to choose or see which coffees are in your delivery
may not be ideal if you enjoy the ritual of other brewing methods

Who tried it

How does Cometeer work?
My first Cometeer delivery came in two boxes.
The first was a large box filled with five smaller boxes of frozen coffee capsules and dry ice.
The second box contained two glass mugs for brewing. But don’t worry — if you already have a  favorite coffee mug , you can use that too.
Each box of coffee includes the name of the roaster, the roast level, and a description of the flavor notes of the coffee.
The first box also included an instructional pamphlet with four ways to brew the coffee, all of which required very few steps. The methods are:
traditional hot coffee
iced coffee
latte
fridge
The traditional hot coffee method was my preferred brewing style.
Here are the basic steps:
Step 1:  Boil water (I used my Stagg EKG Electric Kettle, but any electric or stovetop kettle will work). Remove a Cometeer frozen coffee capsule from your freezer.
Step 2:  Run the unopened capsule under tap water for 10 seconds. This step is optional, though I highly recommend it as it makes it easier to loosen the frozen coffee from the aluminum capsule.
Step 3:  Open the capsule and drop the frozen coffee into your mug of choice.
Step 4:  Pour 6–8 ounces (177–237 milliliters) of hot water over the frozen coffee.
Alternatively, you can use steamed milk in place of some or all of the water to create a latte or pour the slightly thawed capsule over a glass of ice for iced coffee.
Cometeer capsules can be used in any K-cup-compatible machine — just be sure to slightly thaw the capsule first!
Instructions for all of Cometeer’s brewing options can be found on the company’s website.

How does Cometeer coffee taste?
As I mentioned earlier, I had pretty low expectations for Cometeer.
My typical coffee routine involves freshly grinding locally roasted coffee beans at home, measuring out the beans, adding them to my AeroPress, pouring water that’s been precisely heated to 187°F (86°C) over the beans, and following the standard AeroPress brewing procedure.
So, when I heard that Cometeer simply involved putting a frozen coffee puck in a mug and pouring hot water on top, I fully expected the flavor to be less bold and less complex. However, I was happily surprised.
I tried a mix of light, medium, and dark roast blends and a  decaf blend , and not a single one of them tasted bitter or one-note.
In fact, the flavors of the medium blends from ONYX Coffee and Birch were just as rich and complex as the beans from my favorite local artisan roaster, if not more so. Both offered deep chocolaty notes with hints of caramel or nuts that made them great for drinking hot on their own or iced with a splash of  oat milk .
The rest of the blends were also tasty and on par with what you’d expect to get at a pricey brew house.
During my 1-month test, I tried the traditional, refrigerator, and iced coffee methods.
Overall, I liked the traditional method more than the refrigerator method — which involves placing a coffee capsule in the fridge before you go to bed — simply because it didn’t require any planning the night before. However, both methods resulted in a smooth and flavorful cup of coffee.
The iced coffee method was also convenient, though just make sure to fully thaw the coffee puck first.

How much does Cometeer coffee cost?
Each Cometeer subscription shipment costs $69 and includes 32 recyclable capsules. This comes out to about $2.15 per cup.
If you need more coffee, you can add up to 2 additional 8-pack boxes of coffee for $15 each.
The company ships throughout the continental United States. Shipping is free on your first order and costs $9.99 thereafter.
Cometeer shipments are delivered every 1, 2, or 4 weeks and arrive in 1–2 business days after the order is received.
If you need to cancel your subscription, you can do so at any time by logging into your Cometeer account online or contacting the company’s customer support team.
If you don’t want to commit to a subscription right away, you can also choose a one-time shipment, which costs $89.

How to get started
Getting started with a Cometeer subscription is easy. Simply go to the company’s website and select the type of subscription box you’d like to receive.
Current box options include:
Mixed Roast Box
Dark Roast Box
Medium/Dark Roast Box
Medium Roast Box
Light/Medium Roast Box
Light Roast Box
Decaf Box
Half-Caff Box
Each box includes 32 frozen capsules featuring coffee from world-renowned roasters.
At checkout, you can choose to add up to two additional coffee packs, including a Decaf Pack, Half-Caff Pack, or Barista’s Choice Pack.

Is Cometeer worth it?
If you’re looking for a quick, simple way to brew a delicious cup of coffee, then Cometeer is worth trying.
Regardless of which roast or method I used, I ended up with a truly delicious cup of coffee every time.
The subscription model is convenient for people who don’t want to remember to go out and buy coffee beans on a regular basis. It’s also fun getting to taste blends from roasters you otherwise might not have had the chance to try.
Plus, if you’ve been using a K-cup machine, you don’t have to find a new home for your appliance since Cometeer cups are compatible with it.
Finally, keep in mind that while Cometeer capsules are pricier than a bag of coffee beans, the service could save you money if you typically buy your coffee from coffee shops.
Who should not try Cometeer? Based on my experience, there are three main reasons Cometeer might not be the right fit for you:
Price:  At about $2.15 per cup of coffee, Cometeer capsules are generally going to be more expensive than buying a bag of coffee beans. Plus, there’s a $9.99 shipping fee on every order after your first.
Previous investment:  If you already have a local roaster you love and you’ve invested money in tools such as a Chemex or a high end  coffee machine , it may not be worth the switch.
Less of a ritual:  While some people just want to grab their coffee and go in the morning, others find the ritual of brewing coffee relaxing. If you’re in the latter category, you may find yourself missing your morning routine.

Vs. competitors
If your main priority is convenience, you may be wondering how Cometeer compares with other instant coffee options. Here’s a breakdown:
Note:  K-cups and instant coffee packets vary widely in price, depending on the brand, flavor, and retailer. All prices are accurate as of time of publish.
I’ve worked in offices where K-cups and  instant coffee  packets were the only options. And after trying Cometeer, I feel confident in saying that none of those other quick coffee options offer the same quality as Cometeer.
Plus, most K-cups and instant coffee packets are typically packaged with nonrecyclable materials, so they’re a less eco-friendly choice.
While the other options are cheaper, if you appreciate the quality of artisan coffee and want the convenience of instant, Cometeer is the clear winner.

Frequently asked questions
Because Cometeer coffee is sourced from roasters all over the world, every blend has a slightly different strength.
However, according to the company, most fully caffeinated capsules contain around 180 milligrams (mg) of  caffeine . The half-caff capsules contain around 90 mg, and the decaf capsules contain around 9 mg ( 2 ).
Yes. Cometeer coffee capsules can be used in any K-cup-compatible machine.
Yes. According to the company, Cometeer capsules have a shelf life of up to 24 months in the freezer, 72 hours in the fridge, and 24 hours at room temperature.

The bottom line
Cometeer coffee provides a solution for people who value the flavor of artisan-roasted brews but want the convenience of instant or pod-based coffee.
Cometeer coffee can be brewed by simply pouring hot water over the top of a frozen coffee puck. I found it incredibly easy to use, and it tasted just as good as my locally roasted beans.
Keep in mind that, at about $2.15 per cup, Cometeer isn’t particularly cheap. But, for some, the convenience and quality may outweigh the cost.

References:

https://www.healthline.comhttps://time.com/collection/best-inventions-2022/6222186/cometeer/
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/top-evidence-based-health-benefits-of-coffee
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/uses-for-coffee-grounds
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/best-travel-coffee-mug
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/cappuccino-vs-latte-vs-macchiato
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/decaf-coffee-good-or-bad
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/best-oat-milk
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/best-coffee-maker
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/instant-coffee-good-or-bad
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/what-is-caffeine
https://www.healthline.comhttps://help.cometeer.com/en_us/how-much-caffeine-is-in-each-capsule-HkyY0BJhw
