Title: The Mirror Workout Review: Facts, Specs, and Our Experience Trying It

A couple months into testing the Mirror and its workouts, we recommend it for anyone who wants access to a variety of exercise options at home. Keep reading for the full review.
The Mirror is a fitness device that offers a unique home workout option for people who are short on space.
It features thousands of live and on-demand fitness classes, as well as personal training sessions for an additional fee.
But despite the Mirror’s many features, some people are deterred by its high price and membership fees.
So, we tried it for ourselves. Let’s take a closer look at the Mirror and all it has to offer to determine whether it’s worth the price.

What is the Mirror?
The Mirror is an interactive  home fitness device  that offers thousands of live and on-demand workout classes.
When the Mirror is turned off, it looks like a simple full-length mirror.
When it’s turned on, the LCD screen streams fitness classes with an instructor on screen and displays your reflection so you can check your form.
It offers a variety of workouts, such as yoga, Pilates, weight training, and boot camp. There are also barre classes and a chair category, in which the whole class, whether strength or stretching, can be done sitting while on a chair or bench.
During each class, an instructor appears on the screen to demonstrate and explain every exercise.
The bottom of the screen displays several metrics, including your time, calories burned, and target heart rate.
In addition to offering an extensive library of workout classes, the Mirror can connect you with a personal trainer for a tailored one-on-one workout session that suits your schedule.
The basic Mirror package does not come with any exercise equipment, but the Mirror Plus, Pro, and Family packages include accessories such as a heart rate monitor, weights, yoga blocks, and a mat.

Pros and cons at a glance
It doesn’t take up a lot of space and looks like a full-length mirror when not in use.
The huge collection of on-demand classes means you can work out any time you want in the comfort of your home.
The camera allows the instructor to provide feedback during your private sessions and give shout-outs during live group classes.
Unlike other smart gyms, the Mirror offers personal training sessions (for an extra per-session fee).
The Mirror is less expensive than some of its competitors, such as the Tempo Studio and Tonal.
It doesn’t offer built-in storage for any additional workout equipment you might have or need to purchase.
The Mirror is not cheap, and you’ll need a monthly membership if you want to take advantage of any of the classes. (An initial 1-year membership commitment is required.)
The basic Mirror package doesn’t come with any workout accessories, so those will increase the cost as well.
The 1-year warranty is shorter than those of some competitors.
You’ll need a strong internet connection to keep any live workouts running smoothly.

Who tried it
Disclaimer:  A Healthline editor, who received the equipment and trial subscription for free,  completed this review . All opinions are our own.
“I am using the stand, which is essentially an attachment at the bottom that allows it lean to against the wall versus mounting it. I’m really enjoying that it looks decorative and sleek in any room, so it’s in our living room, where I’m more inclined to wake up and use it in the mornings, all the while not being an eyesore.
“I’ve also considered putting it in my home office, where it would be so convenient to use during the day for stretch breaks or quick workouts to give me a mental break.”
“About 2 months in, I have been pleasantly surprised at how nicely this workout mirror has fit into my routine. I am a pretty committed advocate for all things Peloton, so I was curious to see how this could compare and complement my existing workouts.
“First, I tried a few beginner strength classes. It’s way easier for me to convince myself to fit a cardio session into my day, but I’m a lot less motivated by lifting or any kind of strength workout. Read: It’s not my favorite activity and therefore a gap in my fitness routine.
“However, I enjoyed that there were a lot of options and levels. It’s easy to filter classes by bodyweight-only (no weights are a “yay!” for me), and I can select a shorter class that is easier for me to tack on to the end of a run without needing to commit to anything longer than 15 minutes.
“I think that’s what’s great about this — there’s space to take baby steps if you’re a beginner at something.
“You can also filter strength classes by other equipment. For example, if you know you want to do a kettlebell workout, you can select that option. If you just have a foam roller, that’s a filter as well.”
“Compared to the Peloton App membership, which has strength workouts that don’t require a bike or treadmill or any kind of equipment purchase, the Lululemon Studio has more variety. You can select from multiple other channels and studios, including Pure Barre, DOGPOUND, Forward Space, and others that have unique offerings.
“For example, Forward Space is a mixture of dance cardio and what it refers to as moving mediation. So there is a lot to experiment with to keep exercise exciting if you bore easily.
“Most recently, I’ve started getting into the yoga classes as a way to start my day.
“I’ve been having trouble getting motivated to do morning workouts in our garage (aka our home gym), so the fact that the Mirror is in our living room is a huge plus and has re-energized me to wake up before the baby and do some gentle yoga or Hatha classes that wake up my body before I have to chase around two dogs and a crawling infant all day.
“My other favorite category is Chair, where the workouts are done sitting down or relying on a chair. There’s chair yoga, chair stretching, chair strength, chair dance, and chair cardio.
“Overall, I still feel like there is so much to explore in the class offerings, so if you like to mix up your workouts and try new things, this definitely brings that to the table.”
“The one thing I love about Peloton is the personality and rawness of the instructors, so I would say that’s still one area where Peloton shines, but I certainly had no issue finding instructors in the Lulu Studio app that were appealing and motivating.
“It’s just that where Peloton instructors are more likely to go on a personal-yet-entertaining rant about their dating life or take a left turn for a quirky (possibly R-rated) pep talk, Lulu instructors are more likely to stick to their script and keep it traditional.
“One drawback is that the Mirror is not currently compatible with all Bluetooth headphones, so I was not able to connect my Pixel Buds (AirPods are compatible, however). This could be a bummer if you’re working out in the same area as your partner or are trying to be quiet, say getting in a workout before your kids wake up. However, when on the quiet volume and living in a smaller house, the volume hasn’t been an issue yet.
“I also sort of expected that the Mirror was a touch screen, which it’s not — you completely control the mirror through the app on your phone. Definitely not a dealbreaker, but worth noting since it may be a common misconception.”

Key specs and features
Designed to be visually appealing, the Mirror features a carbon-steel frame and a sleek, reflective surface.
The device is 56 inches (in) tall, 22.4 in wide, and 1.4 in thick (142.2 x 56.9 x 3.6 centimeters [cm]), and it weighs 70 pounds (lb), or 31.8 kilograms (kg). It can be wall-mounted or left freestanding but leaning against the wall (a stand is included with your purchase).
The Mirror has a 43-in (109.2-cm) full HD 1080p display with a 178-degree wide viewing angle that makes it easy to view both the workout and yourself. There’s also a built-in camera, microphone, and speaker system.
Using the camera is optional, and the Mirror comes with a lens cap. When you have the camera turned on, your trainer can see your form and provide feedback, and you can interact with your trainer using the microphone.
The Mirror is designed to work with Bluetooth-enabled heart rate monitors, the Apple Watch, and Android Wear OS. You can also purchase smart weights from Mirror that will track your reps and form.
It comes with a standard warranty that covers 1 year of replacement or repairs. If you’d like more protection, you can add an extended protection plan through Mulberry for 2, 3, or 5 years.
Dimensions:  56 x 22.4 x 1.4 in (142.2 x 56.9 x 3.6 cm)
Installation:  wall-mounted or freestanding
Screen:  43-in (109.2-cm) full HD 1080p display with 178-degree wide viewing angle
Classes:  on-demand, live, and competitive, plus personal training sessions ($40 per 30-minute session)
Workout types:  barre, boxing, cardio, chair, competitive, dance, family fun, kettlebells, kickboxing, meditation, Pilates, pre- and postnatal, step, strength training, stretching, tai chi, toning, yoga, and personal training
Warranty:  1-year (can purchase a 2-, 3-, or 5-year extended warranty)
Key features:  reflective surface; compatibility with Bluetooth-enabled heart rate monitors, Apple Watch, and Android Wear OS; camera; smart weights and other exercise equipment available for purchase; built-in speakers and microphone
The basic starter package comes with the Mirror, Mirror stand, Mirror lens cap, and standard warranty.
Other packages include more exercise accessories. For example, the Mirror Plus package also includes:
Mirror Heart Rate Monitor
Mirror Fitness Bands
Lululemon The Reversible Mat 5mm
Lululemon Loop It Up Mat Strap
Lululemon Lift and Lengthen Yoga Block
Lululemon Double Roller Mini
The Mirror Pro package includes all the items listed above, plus a pair of Mirror weights and a Lululemon workout towel.
The Mirror Family package includes the same accessories as the Pro package, but you’ll get two of each (excluding the foam roller).
You can also purchase Mirror exercise accessories a la carte. Options include:
1- or 2-lb (0.5- or 0.9-kg) Ankle Weights ($80–$95)
pairs of Mirror Dumbbells ranging from 1 to 35 lb (0.5 to 15.9 kg) ($50–$200)
Lululemon Studio Heart Rate Monitor ($49.95)
Lululemon Studio Fitness Bands ($49.95)
Lululemon Lift and Lengthen Yoga Block ($18)
Lululemon The Reversible Mat 5mm ($78)
Lululemon The Towel ($38)
Lululemon Loop It Up Mat Strap ($18)
Lululemon Double Roller Mini ($38)
Mirror Care Kit, including camera lens cap for privacy ($19.95)
Additionally, since Lululemon acquired the company, the Mirror website now sells a range of exercise apparel, and you receive 10% your purchases in stores with your Lululemon Studio Membership.

How much does the Mirror cost?
The current list prices for each of the four Mirror packages are:
The Mirror:  $995
Mirror Essentials:  $1,184.65
Mirror Pro:  $1,253.55
Mirror Family:  $1,450,95
Each option includes a standard warranty and a 30-day free trial.
Delivery is free, but if you want professional installation, there’s an additional one-time fee of $250.
Financing is available through Affirm for eligible customers. There are frequently coupon codes on the company’s website, which sometimes include free installation.
Membership costs $39 per month and includes unlimited access for up to 6 individuals.
You can purchase personal training sessions for an additional $40 per session.
Other accessories are available on the company’s website, including fitness bands, a  heart rate monitor , a Mirror Care Kit, and a starter pack.
Membership is required to access all classes on the Mirror. (Without a membership, the Mirror really only serves as a reflective surface to watch yourself work out.)
Keep in mind that an initial 1-year membership commitment is required. After that, you can cancel your membership or switch to paying month by month. The price doesn’t change.
Each membership includes unlimited access for up to six people, making the Mirror a great option for families or large households.

How to get started with the Mirror
The Mirror is designed so you only need enough space to stand in front of it. However, you’ll need at least 2 feet (ft) (61 cm) of wall space near an electrical outlet if you decide to mount it.
You can choose to either mount the Mirror on your wall or elevate it with a floor stand near an electrical outlet. Once the Mirror is in position, you’ll need a strong Wi-Fi connection nearby to stream the classes.
Not interested in doing the installation yourself? Mirror frequently offers promotions that include free installation. Otherwise, you’ll pay $250 for the installation.
If you change your mind about the Mirror within the first 30 days, Mirror offers free pickup and a full refund.
The Mirror is not a touch screen, so you’ll need to control it through the app on your smartphone.
While the app itself is free to download, you’ll need to pay the Mirror membership fee ($39 per month) to really use it. Mirror is currently offering a 30-day free trial of the app.
With the app, you can access the Mirror’s live and on-demand classes and set them to stream on the Mirror.
You can also sync a Bluetooth heart rate monitor or Apple Watch to allow for heart rate-based training. Over time, the app will allow you to track your fitness progress, including workouts completed, calories burned, and minutes in target heart rate zones.

What types of classes does the Mirror offer?
The Mirror offers more than 10,000 workouts in 60 categories, ranging from classes as short as 15 minutes to full training programs. They are appropriate for everyone, from beginners to advanced athletes.
While no exercise equipment is required to use the Mirror, some classes use simple equipment such as weights or resistance bands.
Live classes are available each week, and they offer users the chance for some real-time feedback from the instructor. There are also competitive classes, in which members face off against each other and try to earn points by reaching target  heart rate zones .
Need some pump-up music during your classes? You can use the curated music playlists or sync with Apple Music to listen to your own jams.
Some of the current workout options are:
tai chi
boot camp
yoga flow
strength training
barre
dance cardio
Pilates
boxing
ballet
kettlebell
pre- and postnatal
meditation
If you choose to use the camera during live classes, the instructor and other participants will be able to see you, and you may be “selectively surfaced” to the instructor so that they can offer feedback and encouragement.
Using the camera during private training sessions will allow your instructor to provide form feedback as well.
You can also purchase smart workout equipment, such as weights and ankle weights that can track your reps and form.
When you use a heart rate monitor or Apple Watch while exercising, the Mirror can provide information at the bottom of the screen, including how long you’ve been exercising, how many calories you’ve burned, and whether you’re reaching your target heart rate.
During live classes, your instructor may watch this data and give you a shout-out.
The Mirror also creates a Universal Health Score that’s based on your entire workout history.
This factors in whether you’re hitting your target heart rate, how you’re progressing through strength exercises, and whether you’re doing recovery exercises such as meditations and  cooldowns . This score represents a breakdown of your fitness engagement.
Target heart rate zones are also used during competitive classes, so you’ll need to wear a heart rate monitor that’s connected to the Mirror to participate.
You earn points for your ability to reach and recover from your target zone, and you can compete with other members to see who can best maintain their target heart rate zone.
Personal training sessions are available for an additional fee of $40 per session. Each session lasts 30 minutes. You can choose a trainer yourself, or you can allow the Mirror to select one for you based on the type of training session you want.
These sessions use two-way audio and video, which allows your trainer to help you stay motivated and provide personalized feedback in real time.
If you need to cancel your session, you must do so at least 12 hours in advance, or you’ll still be charged for it.

How do other reviewers feel about the Mirror?
Positive reviews for the Mirror often mention the way it fits in aesthetically. Users also appreciate the wide range of classes.
On Mirror’s website, the Mirror has 4.95 out of 5 stars at the time of publication. Reviewers love the convenience of being able to work out at home at any time. Plus, they frequently mention how easy it is to use and that the classes are enjoyable.
The Mirror is not accredited by the  Better Business Bureau (BBB) . It has a D- grade from the organization and a rating of 1 out of 5 stars, based on 13 customer reviews. The BBB has received 40 complaints about the Mirror in the last 3 years and 12 complaints in the last 12 months.
The Mirror has 2.6 out of 5 stars on  Trustpilot . On that site, it has only six reviews, three of which are 1 star. In the written reviews, the biggest complaints seem to be about customer service and delivery issues.

Who is the Mirror for?
The Mirror is a great option for people with limited space who are looking to squeeze in more physical activity at home.
With a wide selection of classes and personal training options, it likely offers plenty of workouts to fit your needs, regardless of your  fitness level  or schedule.
Although it’s relatively expensive (but recently reduced to less than $1,000), it may be worth the investment if you’re planning on using it instead of paying for a gym membership or taking classes at a fitness studio.
You might find that the initial investment for the Mirror eventually pays for itself, especially if the monthly membership is less than your existing gym or fitness studio membership. It’s worth doing the math before you let the upfront investment scare you away.
The company offers classes ranging from 15 to 60 minutes, so there are options for everyone, regardless of what their weekly schedule looks like.
Personal training  sessions can also be beneficial, especially for those who prefer having someone to help them stay motivated or hold them accountable. But these do cost extra per session.
If the Mirror is out of your price range, plenty of budget-friendly alternatives are available, including  online fitness programs  and free workout videos. You could also consider Peloton’s app-only membership, which doesn’t require any large equipment purchase but does still have a monthly fee that’s about $5 more than the Lululemon Studio membership.

How does the Mirror compare with other smart home gyms?
Wondering how the Mirror stacks up to other home fitness options? Here’s a quick comparison of some of its closest competitors:

Frequently asked questions about the Mirror
You need a Mirror membership to access all fitness classes and sign up for personal training sessions. The subscription costs $39 per month and requires a 1-year initial commitment. Without a subscription, the Mirror functions like a regular reflective mirror.
Yes, Mirror instructors can see you if you choose to use the camera. This gives instructors the ability to offer real-time feedback during personal training sessions. In live group classes, your classmates will also be able to see you, and you can be “selectively surfaced” to the instructor.
The Tonal includes adjustable arms that provide resistance, and most Tonal classes focus on strength training. The Mirror features a wider variety of class types and has a larger screen, but the basic package doesn’t come with any workout accessories.

The bottom line
The Mirror is an interactive home fitness device that streams a variety of live and on-demand workout classes.
Offering more than 60 categories of workouts to choose from, the Mirror can be a fun and flexible way to fit more physical activity into your daily routine.
While the Mirror has a relatively high price, it may be worth the investment for those who are looking for a more convenient alternative to group fitness classes or gym memberships, and it could actually save you money in the long run.

References:

https://www.healthline.com/health/fitness/home-gym-equipment
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/best-heart-rate-monitoring-watch
https://www.healthline.com/health/running-heart-rate#heart-rate-training
https://www.healthline.com/health/tai-chi-benefits
https://www.healthline.com/health/fitness-exercise/pilates-for-weight-loss
https://www.healthline.com/health/exercise-fitness/cooldown-exercises
https://www.bbb.org/us/ny/new-york/profile/exercise-equipment/mirror-0121-182503
https://www.trustpilot.com/review/mirror.co
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/how-to-start-exercising
https://www.healthline.com/health/fitness/benefits-of-personal-training
https://www.healthline.com/health/fitness/best-online-workout-programs
