Title: Splendid Spoon 2024 Review: See Which Items We’d Order Again

Splendid Spoon is a fully plant-based prepared meal delivery service offering a variety of smoothies, soups, grain bowls, and noodle dishes. We tried 25 meals to see which, if any, are worth the cost.

Healthline meal delivery score: 4.3 out of 5
Splendid Spoon is a  plant-based meal delivery service  offering a wide selection of ready-to-eat smoothies, soups, grain bowls, noodle dishes, and entrees.
With a multitude of meals and subscription plans available, Splendid Spoon aims to make plant-based eating easier than ever.
Healthline editor Kelli McGrane, MS, RD, tried several meals from Splendid Spoon — including the latest addition to the company’s product lineup — to help you decide whether this plant-based meal delivery service is worth trying.
Disclaimer: Splendid Spoon provided us press boxes for free, but our opinions are ours alone and have not been reviewed, approved, or otherwise endorsed by Splendid Spoon.
Healthline’s tester scored Splendid Spoon across 9 categories and allotted points from 0–5. The scores below reflect the average rating for each category.
Overall:  4.3
Sign-up, delivery, and cancellation:  4
Meal variety:  3.5
Nutrition:  4.5
Sustainability:  5
Ingredient quality and freshness:  5
Ease of preparation:  4.5
Taste:  4.5
Affordability:  3
Learn more about  our testing process .

What is Splendid Spoon?
Splendid Spoon is a  meal delivery service  that provides fully prepared plant-based meals.
The company offers a rotating menu with more than 60 meals and smoothies, which you can mix and match to make a customized weekly menu.
Splendid Spoon also offers a lineup of Dishes, ready-made entrees that are higher in protein and more filling than some other items on the company’s menu.
Multiple plans are available, depending on how many meals you want to receive. There’s also a Splendid Spoon Marketplace, where you can make one-time purchases.
Additionally, all Splendid Spoon meals are  vegan , low sodium, and free of gluten, soy, and added sugars.

Pros and cons at a glance
The service offers a variety of smoothies and meals with rotating weekly menus.
All meals are vegan, non-GMO, and gluten- and soy-free.
Meals are fully prepared and do not require any prep time.
Noodle bowls, grain bowls, and soups are flavorful and can be frozen for longer storage.
Smoothies are not overly sweet and come in a variety of exciting flavor combinations.
Dishes offer a slightly more filling alternative to the company’s other products.
Splendid Spoon Marketplace allows you to purchase meals without signing up for a subscription.
It’s relatively expensive compared with similar services.
Not all ingredients are organic.
It may not be suitable for those who have severe food allergies or follow certain diets, such as keto or paleo.
Many items are low in calories and may not be filling enough on their own.

Who tried it?
Role:  Healthline Nutrition Editor II
Dietary needs and preferences:   flexitarian
Meal-time preferences:  make-ahead, one-pan, and 30-minute weeknight meals and recipes that are toddler-friendly
As a registered dietitian, nutrition editor, mom, and foodie, I have pretty high standards when it comes to meal delivery services.
I tried more than 25 Splendid Spoon meals, along with a few wellness shots, to help you decide whether this plant-based service is worth the cost.

My experience
When signing up for Splendid Spoon, you start by selecting a weekly box size with 7, 14, or 21 meals. Next, you’ll be prompted to enter your email address and zip code to see whether delivery is available in your area.
If delivery is available, you’ll then be able to start mixing and matching from more than 60 items, including a variety of smoothies, soups, noodle bowls, Dishes, juices, and wellness shots.
All foods are gluten-free, vegan, and made without the use of  GMOs .
I received four prefilled boxes, so I didn’t have a chance to pick and choose my meals.
However, after spending considerable time browsing the website, I imagine that selecting your items would be a painless process.
The service doesn’t offer multiple menus to choose from. However, you can filter by meal type, dietary needs, ingredients you want to avoid, nutritional benefits, and taste and texture, such as spicy or sweet, making it easy to find the meals that best fit your needs and preferences.
If you aren’t ready to commit to a subscription, Splendid Spoon also offers a Marketplace, where you can make one-time purchases of any items on the menu. You can also choose pre-filled boxes, called Bundles, if you’re interested in having a variety of items selected for you.
Compared with many other  prepared meal delivery services , Splendid Spoon’s offerings are more limited if you’re looking for hearty, more filling entrees.
However, if you’re looking for easy lunches or smoothies, I found there to be a good variety of ingredient and flavor combinations to choose from.
At time of publish, the company offers the following meal types:
smoothies
soups
noodle bowls
Dishes
cold-pressed juices
wellness shots
It’s also worth noting that while you can filter by dietary need, such as low sugar or high protein, the number of meal options may be greatly limited.
My items arrived in good condition, with the noodle bowls and soups still frozen. The smoothies, which are refrigerated before shipping, were also slightly frozen because they were packed down by the dry ice.
The smoothies come in narrow bottles that are easy to store in the fridge, and the Dishes are rectangular and stackable. However, I found the noodle bowls and soups to be a bit bulkier and more awkward to store.
Splendid Spoon prides itself on being an  eco-conscious company .
In addition to being 100% plant-based, the company aims to be more sustainable by using 100% recyclable packaging materials, including BPA-free plastics.
According to Splendid Spoon’s website, the brand switched from gel packs to dry ice to further reduce its  carbon footprint .
Splendid Spoon works with both a registered dietitian and a chef to design a menu that’s equally nutritious and delicious.
All Splendid Spoon meals are compatible with a healthy, well-balanced diet and are specifically suitable for the following diets:
plant-based
gluten-free
vegan
Also, several  Whole30 -compatible options are listed on the company’s website.
Although the meals are not designed to be low carb or low fat, nutritional information is available for each item. This can help you select suitable options if you’re following a specific diet.
You can also filter out ingredients to accommodate some food preferences and allergies. However, keep in mind that the meals are produced in a facility that also handles several common allergens.
With that said, Splendid Spoon is not a great fit for the following diets and dietary needs:
ketogenic
paleo
severe  food allergies  or intolerances
Splendid Spoon prioritizes the use of fresh, high quality ingredients in all of its products.
In addition to containing only non-GMO ingredients, 95% of the smoothies are organic.
For the Dishes, soups, and noodle bowls, organic ingredients are sourced whenever possible, especially for foods on the “ Dirty Dozen ” list, which includes the fruits and vegetables that are most likely to contain pesticide residue.
As a plus for people who prefer to eat mostly organic, a full list of ingredients is available for each meal and mentions whether it contains conventional or organic produce.
For freshness, soups and noodle bowls are flash-frozen, which helps maximize their shelf life. Smoothies and Dishes are refrigerated and shipped in recyclable insulation to ensure that they arrive fresh.
I found all of the ingredients in my meals to be flavorful and fresh-tasting, even after reheating.
Tester score: 5 out of 5
As with many prepared meals, Splendid Spoon’s offerings were straightforward to prepare. The smoothies were enjoyable straight from the fridge, and the soups, noodle bowls, and Dishes were easily reheated in the microwave.
Here are my general thoughts on the overall taste and texture of Splendid Spoon’s main product types.
Unlike the soups and noodle bowls, which typically provide fewer than 300 calories per container, Dishes are designed to be slightly more filling. Depending on the flavor, Dishes provide approximately 337–448 calories and 12–22 grams of protein per container.
I tried six flavors:
Creamy Korma
Roasted Cauliflower & Falafel
Falafel
Roasted Tomato Risotto (my favorite)
Vegan Chick’n Parm
Vegan Shepherd’s Pie
Dishes can be either reheated in the oven/toaster oven for 10 minutes or microwaved for 3–5 minutes. I went with the latter option.
All the meals were fully heated within 5 minutes or less, and none of the ingredients became soggy or mushy — a win for any prepared meal.
My favorites out of the six were the Creamy Korma, Roasted Tomato Risotto, and Vegan Chick’n Parm. I found these three to offer the best flavors and textures. I especially loved the risotto with its creamy yet chewy texture.
If you like shepherd’s pie, then you’ll like this vegan variation. I’m personally not a huge fan of shepherd’s pie, so it wasn’t a surprise that the entree wasn’t my favorite. But the  sweet potato  mash on top was a nice healthy twist, and I enjoyed the roasted Brussels sprouts on the side.
The falafel Dishes were the only ones that fell short when it came to the texture. After microwaving them, I found the  falafel  to be unpleasantly dry.
With that said, the other components of these meals were great. The hummus in the standard Falafel entree was wonderfully smooth and creamy, and the Za’atar & Lemon Tahini Sauce that came with the Roasted Cauliflower meal was very tasty.
Splendid Spoon’s soups and noodle bowls are conveniently packaged in microwave-safe containers, though you’ll need to remove the lid and plastic film first.
According to the package, these entrees take 2–5 minutes to reheat. Because I kept my meals in the freezer, I found that they took closer to 5–6 minutes to fully reheat and needed to be stirred halfway through for even cooking.
By far my favorite items were the noodle bowls, as they included generous amounts of vegetables and featured flavor-filled sauces that aligned with my food preferences.
The noodles retained a nice chewy texture even after being frozen and microwaved — a big win compared with  other prepared meal delivery services  I’ve tried.
I have to admit that I’m not a huge soup fan and got bored of the soups after a few spoonfuls. But if you like soups, I think you’ll be happy with Splendid Spoon’s creative flavor combinations.
I have mixed feelings about Splendid Spoon’s smoothies. On one hand, I appreciated the unique combinations of fruits, vegetables, and extras, like  cacao powder  and almond butter. I also found the smoothies to be filling and not overly sweet.
However, the consistency wasn’t always the best and varied by flavor.
For example, the Coffee Frappe and Raspberry Cacao smoothies had a pleasant creamy texture, whereas the Mint Chip smoothie had a strange thick texture that I wouldn’t describe as creamy.
I didn’t get a chance to try Splendid Spoon’s cold-pressed juices. However, I did receive a variety of wellness shots.
While the wellness shots do contain nutrient-rich ingredients, professionally, I’m not a huge fan of some of the health claims the company makes about them.
For example, the company claims the Detox Shot can “flush toxins away,” yet there’s no evidence that this shot or  similar products  have any effect on ridding your body of toxins. Plus, your body already has an efficient detoxification system.
Science aside, I also didn’t find these shots enjoyable to drink.

Would I try Splendid Spoon again?
Yes, though not as a subscription.
With the exception of the wellness shots, I found Splendid Spoon to be a more nutritious and flavorful alternative to buying  frozen meals  from the grocery store.
As mentioned earlier, I have a busy lifestyle, so having balanced meals in the freezer that require just 5 minutes in the microwave is a major win in my book.
However, there are some potential downsides to consider. For starters, most of the meals provide fewer than 400 calories, which may leave  some adults  still feeling hungry afterward.
This isn’t a big deal-breaker for me, as I typically prefer to eat small, frequent meals throughout the day.
The main reason that I don’t see myself subscribing is the cost — especially considering that I’d still need to purchase groceries for my family’s meals and snacks throughout the week.
With that said, I do see myself occasionally ordering from the Marketplace to stock up on my favorites, including the Raspberry Cacao Smoothie, Coffee Frappe Smoothie, Vegan Meatballs & Marinara Noodles, and Dan Dan Noodles.

How much does Splendid Spoon cost?
Splendid Spoon prices vary based on the number and types of meals you select.
Meals range in price from $9.99–$13.49.
Here are the general prices for each box size:
Keep in mind that the final cost may vary depending on which items you select.
Current prices for each meal type are as follows:
Smoothies:  $9.99 each
Soups and grain bowls:  $12.49 each
Noodles:  $13.49 each
Dishes:  $13.49 each
Splendid Spoon is available in all 48 contiguous United States.
Note that all prices above are current as of publication but are subject to change.

Customer reviews and brand reputation
Splendid Spoon was founded in 2013 and is headquartered in New York City.
Most online reviews of Splendid Spoon are positive, with customers noting that the meals make it easy and convenient to eat healthier.
Reviewers also share that while the meals are designed to be lower in sugar and sodium, they are still plenty flavorful and satisfying.
The most common complaint is about the price, though some people also dislike the texture of the smoothies.

Comparison with competitors
Several similar services offer quick and convenient plant-based meals and smoothies as well.
Daily Harvest  is the closest competitor to Splendid Spoon, as it also offers 100% plant-based items that are geared more toward breakfast, lunch, and light dinners.
However, for people interested in heartier plant-based meals,  Purple Carrot  is worth considering.
Here’s a quick look at how these plant-based meal delivery services compare:
Note:  Daily Harvest offers some less expensive menu items, such as lattes, which start at $5.99 for 2 servings. The price range above reflects the price per serving for smoothies and entrees.

Who should try Splendid Spoon?
Splendid Spoon may be a good option for:
people seeking a quick and convenient way to enjoy fresh plant-based meals at home, with little to no effort required
those looking to transition to a  plant-based eating pattern  or include more fruits and vegetables in their diet
individuals interested in a meal plan to support weight loss when paired with a healthy lifestyle and regular physical activity
people looking to occasionally stock up on smoothies or frozen entrees
On the other hand, some people may want to skip Splendid Spoon, including those who:
are on a tight budget
follow diet plans that typically include animal proteins, such as paleo or keto
are interested in improving their cooking skills or learning to make fresh and healthy meals at home
prefer eating only  organic , as many Splendid Spoon meals contain some conventional produce
need or want higher calorie entrees

Frequently asked questions
Splendid Spoon meals are prepared in upstate New York. After being flash-frozen or pasteurized for optimal freshness, the meals are distributed to one of four fulfillment centers across the United States before being shipped to your door.
Splendid Spoon meals are prepared in upstate New York. After being flash-frozen or pasteurized for optimal freshness, the meals are distributed to one of four fulfillment centers across the United States before being shipped to your door.

Although it doesn’t specifically claim to promote  weight loss , some people may lose weight while using Splendid Spoon.
In addition to potentially helping you reduce your  calorie intake  for the day, Splendid Spoon meals may support weight loss because of their focus on  plant-based ,  high fiber  ingredients.

However, whether you lose weight while using Splendid Spoon depends on several factors, including your current diet and lifestyle and what other foods you’re consuming.

Although it doesn’t specifically claim to promote  weight loss , some people may lose weight while using Splendid Spoon.
In addition to potentially helping you reduce your  calorie intake  for the day, Splendid Spoon meals may support weight loss because of their focus on  plant-based ,  high fiber  ingredients.

However, whether you lose weight while using Splendid Spoon depends on several factors, including your current diet and lifestyle and what other foods you’re consuming.
Splendid Spoon smoothies make for a healthy breakfast or snack because they’re relatively low in  total and added sugar  and made with nutrient-rich ingredients such as leafy greens, fruits, avocado, seeds, and nut butter.
Some flavors also contain organic  pea protein powder  to help keep you full longer.
Splendid Spoon smoothies make for a healthy breakfast or snack because they’re relatively low in  total and added sugar  and made with nutrient-rich ingredients such as leafy greens, fruits, avocado, seeds, and nut butter.
Some flavors also contain organic  pea protein powder  to help keep you full longer.

The bottom line
Splendid Spoon is a meal delivery service that provides delicious plant-based meals that are fully prepared and ready to enjoy.
It offers a variety of meals that suit many dietary restrictions and food preferences.
When paired with a healthy lifestyle and  regular physical activity , it may also aid weight loss, if that is a goal for you.
However, it’s relatively expensive and may not be suitable for people who follow certain diets, have severe food allergies, or prefer to eat only organic produce.

References:

https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/plant-based-meal-delivery
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/how-we-test-meal-kits
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/best-meal-delivery-service
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/what-is-a-vegan
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/flexitarian-diet-guide
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/gmo-pros-and-cons
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/best-prepared-meal-delivery-service
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/unpasteurized-juice
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/sustainable-meal-delivery
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/how-to-reduce-carbon-footprint
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/whole-30
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/common-food-allergies
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/dirty-dozen-foods
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/sweet-potato-vs-potato
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/is-falafel-healthy
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/best-prepared-meal-delivery-service
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/cacao-vs-cocoa
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/detox-diets-101
https://www.healthline.com/health/food-nutrition/low-sodium-frozen-meals
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/how-many-calories-per-day
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/daily-harvest-cost
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/purple-carrot-review
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/plant-based-diet-guide
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/what-is-organic-food
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/how-to-lose-weight-as-fast-as-possible
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/how-many-calories-per-day
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8701327/
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6768815/
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/how-to-lose-weight-as-fast-as-possible
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/how-many-calories-per-day
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8701327/
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6768815/
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/too-much-sugar
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/pea-protein-powder
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/too-much-sugar
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/pea-protein-powder
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/10-benefits-of-exercise
