Title: 7 Healthy Stir-Fry Recipes

Making a stir-fry is an easy way to prepare a balanced meal.
Most stir-fry recipes include a source of protein, non-starchy vegetables, and some type of carb. They’re usually coated in a delicious sauce and don’t take long to prepare.
Take-out stir-fries tend to be loaded with sodium and may be high in refined carbs like rice and noodles. Making them at home will give you more control over the ingredients so you can enjoy a healthier stir-fry.
Here are 7 healthy stir-fry recipes to try.

1. Chicken stir-fry
Chicken  is one of the most popular meats to include in a stir-fry, as it’s an affordable source of satisfying protein and soaks up flavors well ( 1 ).
To make an easy chicken stir-fry, heat 1 tablespoon (15 mL) of oil in a large wok or skillet over medium-high heat. Add 1 pound (450 grams) of cubed chicken breast and cook for 2–3 minutes on each side until cooked through. Remove from the skillet and set aside.
Add another tablespoon (15 mL) of oil to the skillet along with 1 cup (149 grams) of diced bell peppers and 1 cup (155 grams) of sliced carrots.
In a separate bowl, whisk 1/4 cup (60 mL) of low sodium soy sauce, 1/4 cup (60 mL) of chicken broth, 2 tablespoons (42 grams) of honey, 2 cloves of minced garlic, and 1 tablespoon of  cornstarch .
When the veggies are slightly tender after a few minutes of cooking, pour the sauce into the skillet and reduce the heat to medium-low. Add the chicken and cook for a few more minutes until the sauce thickens.
Servings:  4
Calories:  333
Total fat:  12 grams
Saturated fat:  2.4 grams
Unsaturated fat:  8.6 grams
Sodium:  748 mg
Carbs:  18 grams
Fiber:  2 grams
Protein:  37 grams

2. Shrimp stir-fry
Adding  shrimp  to a stir-fry is an easy way to increase your intake of the heart-healthy omega-3 fatty acids found in seafood ( 2 ).
Cook about 1 pound (450 grams) of peeled and deveined shrimp in 1 tablespoon (15 mL) of oil until it turns pink, about 2–3 minutes per side. Use a large wok or skillet over medium-high heat. Remove the shrimp, and heat another tablespoon (15 mL) of oil.
Add 1 cup (98 grams) of snow peas, 1 cup (91 grams) of broccoli florets, and 1 cup (155 grams) of sliced carrots to the skillet. Cook for a few minutes until slightly tender, then add the shrimp to the veggies.
In a small bowl, stir 3 tablespoons (45 mL) of low sodium  soy sauce , 2 tablespoons (30 mL) of oyster sauce, 1 tablespoon (15 mL) of lime juice, 1 tablespoon (21 grams) of honey, 2 cloves of minced garlic, and 1 teaspoon of cornstarch.
Pour the mixture into the skillet, reduce the heat, and cook for a few minutes until the sauce thickens.
Servings:  4
Calories:  206
Total fat:  9 grams
Saturated fat:  1.5 grams
Unsaturated fat:  5.8 grams
Sodium:  1,537 mg*
Carbs:  16 grams
Fiber:  2.5 grams
Protein:  18 grams
*Note that oyster sauce is high in sodium. Omit it from the recipe if needed.

3. Beef stir-fry
If you’re in the mood for a highly flavorful stir-fry, use  beef  as your protein source.
Slice 1 pound (450 grams) of beef sirloin into thin strips. In a large skillet or wok over medium-high heat, heat 1 tablespoon (15 mL) of oil, add the beef, and cook for a few minutes on all sides until cooked through, about 4–5 minutes. Transfer the beef to a plate.
Add another tablespoon (15 mL) of oil to the skillet with 2 cups (182 grams) of broccoli florets, 1 cup (145 grams) of green peas, and 2 sliced green onions. Cook for a few minutes.
Whisk 1/4 cup (60 mL) of low sodium soy sauce, 1/4 cup (60 mL) of orange juice, 1/4 cup (60 mL) of water, 2 tablespoons (42 grams) of  honey , 3 minced garlic cloves, a pinch of ginger powder, and 1 tablespoon of cornstarch.
Pour the sauce in the skillet with the veggies, and add the beef. Lower the heat, and cook for a few minutes until the sauce thickens.
Servings:  4
Calories:  449
Total fat:  24 grams
Saturated fat:  8 grams
Unsaturated fat:  13.8 grams
Sodium:  657 mg
Carbs:  22 grams
Fiber:  3.5 grams
Protein:  35 grams

4. Noodle stir-fry
Noodle stir-fry, often referred to as lo mein, features  ramen  or spaghetti noodles that are added to the skillet at the end of the cooking process.
To make noodle stir-fry, cook about 6 ounces (170 grams) of your choice of noodles according to the package directions. Drain and set aside for later use.
Make the stir-fry sauce by whisking 3 tablespoons (45 mL) of low sodium soy sauce, 2 tablespoons (30 mL) of  rice vinegar , 2 teaspoons (14 grams) of honey, 2 teaspoons (10 mL) of sesame oil, and 1 teaspoon (5 mL) of sriracha sauce.
Heat 1–2 tablespoons (15–30 mL) of oil in a large skillet or wok over medium-high heat. Add 2 cups (168 grams) of sliced mushrooms, 1 cup (70 grams) of chopped bok choy or kale, 1 cup (155 grams) of sliced carrots, and 1 sliced bell pepper.
Cook for a few minutes until the veggies start to soften. Add the cooked noodles and a protein of your choice, if desired. Stir in the sauce and cook over medium heat for a few minutes. If the sauce is too thick, add a splash of water.
Servings:  4
Calories:  168
Total fat:  7 grams
Saturated fat:  1 gram
Unsaturated fat:  5 grams
Sodium:  509 mg
Carbs:  23 grams
Fiber:  3 grams
Protein:  5.6 grams

5. Veggie and edamame stir-fry
For a vegetarian or vegan option, try a veggie stir-fry.
You can use all kinds of veggies in a stir-fry, including fresh, frozen, or roasted. Adding cooked  edamame  increases the protein content of the dish and makes it more filling.
Heat 2 tablespoons (30 mL) of oil in a large skillet or wok over medium-high heat.
Add 1 cup (84 grams) of sliced mushrooms, 1 cup (89 grams) of shredded cabbage, 1/2 cup (78 grams) of shredded carrots, 1/2 cup (97 grams) of diced onion, and 1/2 cup (74 grams) of chopped  zucchini .
If you have access to baby corn or water chestnuts, add these in place of or in addition to one of the other veggies listed here. Cook for 5–7 minutes until the veggies are tender and cooked to your liking.
Stir in 1 cup (180 grams) of cooked edamame and a sauce made from 2 tablespoons (30 mL) of maple syrup and 1/4 cup (60 mL) each of vegetable broth and low sodium soy sauce.
In a separate bowl, whisk together 2 teaspoons of cornstarch and 1 tablespoon (15 mL) of cold water. Add this mixture to the skillet to help thicken the sauce.
Cook for a few minutes until the dish is warmed through and the sauce is at your desired consistency.
Servings:  4
Calories:  195
Total fat:  10 grams
Saturated fat:  1 gram
Unsaturated fat:  7.6 grams
Sodium:  644 mg
Carbs:  20.5 grams
Fiber:  4 grams
Protein:  9 grams

6. Tofu stir-fry
Tofu  is an excellent source of plant-based protein and can be used in place of chicken, beef, or shrimp in most stir-fry recipes.
For a delicious tofu stir-fry, drain a 14-ounce (397-gram) package of firm tofu and cut it into cubes. Heat 1 tablespoon (15 mL) of oil in a large wok or skillet over medium-high heat. Add the tofu, and cook for a few minutes on each side until lightly browned.
Add 1 sliced bell pepper, 5 heads of baby bok choy that have been sliced in half, and 1 cup (98 grams) of snow peas to the skillet. Cook for a few more minutes.
In a bowl, stir 1/4 cup (64 grams) of creamy peanut butter, 2 tablespoons (30 mL) of low sodium soy sauce, 1 tablespoon (15 mL) of lime juice, 1 tablespoon (21 grams) of honey, and 1 tablespoon of grated fresh  ginger .
Add water as needed to thin. Pour the sauce into the skillet with the veggies and tofu, and cook until warmed through.
Servings:  4
Calories:  277
Total fat:  17 grams
Saturated fat:  2.8 grams
Unsaturated fat:  6.5 grams
Sodium:  382 mg
Carbs:  18 grams
Fiber:  4 grams
Protein:  18 grams

7. Fridge or freezer stir-fry
Most stir-fries tend to have the same basic formula.
You can combine any kind of  protein  and veggies you have on hand and make a basic sauce from pantry ingredients.
Here are some ideas for what to use to make a stir-fry with things you have in your fridge or freezer:
Veggies (4–5 cups):  frozen, fresh, or leftover cooked broccoli, carrots, onions (green, yellow, or red), corn (kernels or baby corn), sweet potatoes, cauliflower, zucchini, cabbage, spinach, kale, bok choy, peas (snow, sugar snap, green), mushrooms
Protein (1 pound or 450 grams of meat or 1 cup plant-based):  chicken, beef, shrimp, pork, beans, tofu, nuts, or seeds
Carbs (1 cup):  leftover pasta, noodles, rice, or even potatoes
Sauce:  make a basic sauce from 1/4 cup (60 mL) of soy sauce, 1/4 cup (60 mL) of your choice of broth, 1 tablespoon (15 mL) of rice wine vinegar (sub apple cider vinegar or lime juice), 1 tablespoon (21 grams) of honey or  maple syrup
If your protein hasn’t been cooked yet, start by cooking it in a large skillet with some oil. Remove it from heat and set aside.
Cook the veggies for a few minutes with a little more oil, add the protein back in, and stir in the sauce. Serve over carbs of your choice, if desired.
To thicken your stir-fry sauce, add up to 2 tablespoons of cornstarch mixed with 2 tablespoons (30 mL) of cold water to the sauce or skillet toward the end of cooking.
It’s easy to make a quick stir-fry with ingredients you have in your fridge or freezer. Combine veggies, protein, and carbs of your choice with a basic stir-fry sauce.

General tips for making stir-fry
Stir-fries are highly customizable, but there are a few general tips to keep in mind when making them.
Since stir-fries are usually cooked over medium-high heat, it’s best to use  oils  that can withstand high heat, like avocado or peanut oil. However, olive, canola, vegetable, and coconut oils will also work.
Stir-fry recipes are also commonly served over rice or noodles. If you’re watching your carb intake, be mindful of serving sizes when including rice or noodles.
To add nutrients and extra fiber, use whole wheat pasta or brown rice. If you want a low carb or gluten-free option, try substituting zucchini noodles or cauliflower rice.
Feel free to change up the sauce ingredients depending on your preferences or needs. Ginger, garlic, and fresh citrus juices are always great additions.
If you’re watching your sodium intake, use reduced or low sodium soy sauce. Tamari and  coconut aminos  are gluten-free soy alternatives.
Before serving a stir-fry, consider topping it with chopped cashews, toasted sesame seeds, or sliced green onions.
Stir-fry recipes can be customized to meet your needs. You can switch up the ingredients you use to cut back on carbs, reduce your sodium intake, or avoid gluten.

The bottom line
Stir-fries are typically made with veggies and protein, coated in sauce, and served over rice or  noodles .
They’re also nutritionally balanced, easy to make, and highly customizable. Oftentimes, they can be made with ingredients you already have on hand.

References:

https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/protein-in-chicken
https://www.healthline.comhttps://fdc.nal.usda.gov/fdc-app.html#/food-details/1098443/nutrients
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/substitutes-for-cornstarch
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/is-shrimp-healthy
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4776937/
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/is-soy-sauce-bad-for-you
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/grass-fed-vs-grain-fed-beef
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/10-benefits-of-honey
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/ramen-noodles
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/rice-vinegar-substitutes
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/edamame-benefits
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/zucchini-benefits
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/what-is-tofu
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/11-proven-benefits-of-ginger
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/how-much-protein-per-day
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/maple-syrup
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/healthy-cooking-oils
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/coconut-aminos
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/low-carb-pasta
