Title: 12 Best Reusable Coffee Mugs to Save You an Expensive Trip to the Coffee Shop

If your day regularly starts with a stop at your favorite coffee shop, then there’s a good chance you could be saving money — and cutting down on waste — by bringing your own mug.
Many coffee shops offer discounts to patrons who provide their own reusable mugs.
Plus, using your own mug can reduce waste and help keep your beverage hot or cold longer than the typical to-go cup.
Whether you purchase coffee from a store, brew it at home and take it on the go, or simply want to keep your beverage hot (or cold) longer at home, a reusable coffee mug is a worthwhile investment.
Keep reading for our picks of the 12 best reusable travel mugs for every coffee drinker.

A quick look at the best travel coffee mugs
Easiest to clean:   YETI Rambler
Best ceramic:  W&P Porter Ceramic Mug
Best leakproof:   Contigo Autoseal West Loop Vacuum-Insulated Travel Mug
Best for camping:   YETI Rambler Mug
Best for commuting:   Hydro Flask Coffee Flask with Flex Sip Lid
Best with a handle:  BruMate Toddy
Best insulated:  CamelBak Horizon Tumbler
Best eco-friendly:  MiiR TruEnamel Camp Cup
Best with a straw:   Simple Modern Insulated Tumbler Cup
Best for iced coffee:   Fellow Carter Move Travel Mug
Best splurge:  Ember Temperature Control Smart Mug 2
Best affordable:   CIVAGO Stainless Steel Coffee Mug Cup

What are the benefits of a reusable coffee mug?
There are many benefits to choosing a reusable coffee mug over a disposable one.
For example, many travel mugs are designed to maintain the temperature of your coffee or other beverage, whether hot or cold, for longer periods of time, so there’s no need to reheat.
Additionally, they  eliminate the waste  created by using a paper or plastic to-go cup. Some coffee shops will even offer a discount to customers who bring their own cups, so you may save some money.
What’s more, recent research has found that some traditional paper cups contain materials that release toxic heavy metals when in contact with hot liquids over a period of time. A reusable mug could help decrease your exposure to these ( 1 ).

How we chose
We selected the best reusable coffee mugs based on the following criteria:
Editor recommendations:  We asked Healthline editors to share the products they own, love, and would recommend.
Price:  We included mugs at a range of prices to fit almost any budget.
Features:  We selected products with unique features to suit a variety of needs and preferences.
Vetting:  All the products on our list have been vetted to ensure that they align with Healthline’s brand integrity standards and approach to well-being. You can read more about  our vetting process .
General price ranges with dollar signs ($–$$$) are indicated below. One dollar sign means the product is rather affordable, whereas three dollar signs indicate a higher cost.
Generally, prices range from $14.99 to $149.95, though this may vary depending on where you shop. Prices may also vary for products that are available in multiple sizes.
$  = under $25
$$  = $25–$50
$$$  = over $50

Healthline’s picks of the best reusable coffee mugs
Price:  $–$$
Dishwasher-safe:  yes
Volume:  10, 20, or 30 ounces (oz) (296, 592, or 887 milliliters [mL])
If washing your coffee mug by hand every day sounds like a chore, the YETI Rambler may be a good option for you because it’s completely dishwasher-safe. It’s also highly recommended by several of Healthline’s editors.
The slider lid is magnetic, making the tumbler easy to drink from on the go. However, the lid will not prevent leaks or spills.
The YETI Rambler is also customizable — you can add text, monograms, and even images to your cup.
“I like using it most when I have a string of work meetings back to back, if I’m traveling, or otherwise want to be able to keep my drink warm (or chilled) for a while.”
— Healthline   Editor Candice Abellon
dishwasher-safe
available in multiple colors and sizes
customizable
fits in most cupholders
magnetic slider for easy drinking on the go
double-wall vacuum insulation to keep drinks hot or cold for hours
includes a 5-year warranty
does not protect against leaks or spills
Price:  $$
Dishwasher-safe:  yes
Volume:  12 oz (355 mL) or 16 oz (473 mL)
The W&P Porter Ceramic Mug is dishwasher-safe and made from durable ceramic that allows for a neutral flavor.
This means it won’t absorb flavors from your drinks, and you won’t notice any lingering tastes or smells from previous beverages.
The mug is protected from scratches by a soft matte silicone sleeve, which also allows for that warm cup feeling in your hands. However, because of this, the mug is not designed to keep your drink hot for any longer than a regular mug.
“I enjoy this mug for  tea  and, compared to other mugs I’ve tried, it feels the most like a mug, not like a travel cup.”
—  Healthline Senior Editor Lisa Valente, MS, RD
available in multiple colors and two sizes
microwave- and dishwasher-safe
fits in most cupholders
made of ceramic, which may help prevent lingering tastes or smells from previous beverages
no metallic taste
not insulated
does not protect against leaks or spills
can get uncomfortably hot to hold when just-boiled water or very hot coffee is poured in
Price:  $–$$
Dishwasher-safe:  lid only
Volume:  10 oz (296 mL), 20 oz (592 mL), or 24 oz (710 mL)
Healthline Nutrition and Fitness Market Editor Kelli McGrane, MS, RD, is a fan of the Contigo Autoseal mug because she can trust it not to leak.
It’s designed to keep drinks hot for up to 7 hours or cold for up to 18 hours.
McGrane says that while the mug won’t leak or spill if dropped, it does dent easily.
The body of the mug isn’t dishwasher-friendly, but you can throw the lid in the dishwasher to help make keeping it clean a bit easier.
“Not only is it slim enough to fit almost any cup holder — including my stroller’s cupholder, which isn’t easy to do — I appreciate that it keeps my coffee hot for several hours and doesn’t leak. From bumpy walks with my  stroller  to throwing it in my bag on a hike, I’ve yet to have an issue with coffee getting all over my stuff.”
—  Healthline Nutrition and Fitness Market Editor Kelli McGrane, MS, RD
available in several sizes and colors
dishwasher-safe lid
protects against leaks and spills
fits in most cup holders
keeps drinks hot for up to 7 hours and cold for up to 18 hours
includes a lifetime guarantee
body of mug not dishwasher-safe
dents easily when dropped
Price:  $$
Dishwasher-safe:  yes
Volume:  10 oz (296 mL), 14 oz (414 mL), or 24 oz (710 mL)
Ideal for  camping  or just for cozier vibes, the YETI Rambler Mug comes in a more traditional coffee mug shape with a handle and a wider mouth.
Like YETI’s larger models, it features a double-wall, vacuum-insulated design to keep drinks hot or cold longer.
According to the brand’s website, it also works well as a bowl for keeping foods like chili and  oatmeal  hot when you’re camping.
Just like the bigger models of the Rambler, this one has a magnetic slider lid, but keep in mind that the lid won’t prevent leaks or spills. Another downside to consider: The handle might make it incompatible with most cupholders.
“This is one of those mugs that I’ve seen ‘fought’ over in a household, so if you’re gifting, it may be best given in pairs.”
— Healthline   Editor Candice Abellon
available in multiple sizes and colors
customizable
double-wall vacuum-insulated design to keep drinks hot or cold for hours
works well for hot food items such as oatmeal and soup
includes a 5-year warranty
not compatible with most cupholders
does not protect against leaks or spills
Price:  $$
Dishwasher-safe:  top rack only
Volume:  12 oz (355 mL), 16 oz (473 mL), or 20 oz (591 mL)
If you typically drink your  morning coffee  on your way to the office, you’re likely looking for a mug that will fit in your cupholder and won’t leak.
This Hydro Flask mug is designed to fit most cupholders and even side pockets on backpacks and other bags. It also has a convenient flex strap at the top, which makes it easy to grab and go as you’re heading out the door.
This travel mug is compatible with Hydro Flask’s straw lid if you prefer, but to take advantage of the leakproof feature, you’ll want to stick with the Flex Sip Lid.
It’s also dishwasher-safe, so it’s super easy to clean — just make sure you put it on the top rack.
“I love this mug, as it keeps coffee hot for a long time and it doesn’t leak — a feature I particularly loved when I was commuting to work every day. You don’t have to worry about throwing it in your bag and having it get all over everything.”
—  Healthline Senior Editor Chelsea Logan
available in multiple sizes and colors
top rack dishwasher-safe
leakproof lid
smooth flow opening designed for hot liquids
flex strap for easy transport
fits in most cupholders and backpack side pockets
includes a lifetime warranty
insulated to keep beverages hot or cold for hours
some reports of difficulty getting the lid to tighten enough to prevent leaking
Price:  $$
Dishwasher-safe:  yes
Volume:  16 oz (473 mL), 22 oz (652 mL), or 32 oz (946 mL)
The BruMate Toddy combines the convenience of a travel mug that fits in your cupholder with the comfort of a handle.
It’s also completely leakproof and insulated to keep hot drinks hot for up to 7 hours and cold drinks cold for 24 hours or longer.
Another perk: You won’t have to deal with condensation when sipping on something cold. This means the cup will stay dry no matter how long you take to enjoy your drink.
However, while this cup won’t leak on you, some say the lid can be difficult to remove.
available in multiple colors and sizes
dishwasher-safe
leakproof
insulated to keep drinks hot for up to 7 hours or cold for 24 hours or longer
has a handle but still fits in most cupholders
designed to prevent condensation
nonslip base
includes a limited lifetime warranty
lid that takes up a decent amount of space, so you can’t fill the mug all the way to the top
lid that can be difficult to remove
Price:  $–$$
Dishwasher-safe:  yes
Volume:  12 oz (355 mL), 16 oz (473 mL), 20 oz (591 mL), or 30 oz (887 mL)
An insulated mug is a good choice if you like to take your time finishing your drink. This tumbler is vacuum-insulated and designed to keep your drink hot for up to 7 hours or cold for up to 14 hours.
It’s also spill-resistant and will fit in most cupholders, so it’s a great option for when you’re on the run. What’s more, you can toss it in the dishwasher when you’re done, making cleaning a breeze.
“This is my go-to when I want hot coffee in the morning but my kids keep distracting me.”
—  Healthline Senior Editor Lisa Valente, MS, RD
available in multiple sizes and colors
double-wall vacuum insulated to keep drinks hot for up to 7 hours and cold for up to 14 hours
designed to be spill-resistant
fits in most cupholders
dishwasher-safe
tri-mode flow control lid for hot liquids
nonslip base
does not protect against spills
some reports that the 12-oz (355-mL) size is awkward to hold
Price:  $$
Dishwasher-safe:  lid only
Volume:  12 oz (355 mL)
While choosing a reusable mug over a disposable option from the coffee shop is already a sustainable choice, you may want to take it a step further.
MiiR creates products based on four design principles: minimal, sustainable, functional, and enduring. The company is a Certified B Corporation and is committing to  Net Zero  by 2030, which aims to achieve no impact on climate from greenhouse gas emissions.
What’s more, the company is  Climate Neutral Certified , which means it meets peer-reviewed standards for reducing its carbon footprint.
This cup is designed with vacuum-insulated stainless steel to keep your drink hot or cold and has an ergonomic handle and splash-proof lid. Plus, in addition to looking nice, the real fired-glass enamel design protects against lingering smells from previous drinks.
However, only the lid is dishwasher-safe — you’ll need to wash the mug by hand.
dishwasher-safe and splash-proof lid
vacuum-insulated stainless steel
stylish design
ergonomic handle
real fired-glass enamel to prevent lingering smells or tastes
sustainability-conscious company
includes a lifetime warranty
mug not dishwasher-safe
available in only one size and color
not designed to prevent spills or leaks
does not fit in most cupholders
Price:  $–$$
Dishwasher-safe:  lid only
Volume:  12 oz (355 mL), 16 oz (473 mL), 20 oz (591 mL), 24 oz (710 mL), 28 oz (828 mL), or 32 oz (946 mL)
If you prefer to drink from a straw or would like the option of switching from a flip lid to a straw, the Simple Modern tumbler might be the right choice for you.
With sizes ranging from 12 to 32 oz and several different designs and colors, it’s easy to find one that will fit your needs and style preferences.
The cup has double-wall insulation to help keep your drink hot for 12 hours or cold for 24 hours. It’s also cupholder-friendly, which is great if you plan to use it on the go.
Both the flip lid and the straw lid are dishwasher-safe, but the body of the cup should be washed by hand.
available in multiple sizes and colors
dishwasher-safe lid
option for a straw or flip lid
fits in most cupholders
double-wall insulation to keep drinks hot for up to 12 hours or cold for up to 24 hours
includes a limited lifetime warranty
not the most durable straw
cup not spill-proof when straw lid is on
Price:  $$
Dishwasher-safe:  no
Volume:  8 oz (237 mL), 12 oz (355 mL), or 16 oz (473 mL)
While several cups on our list will keep your  iced coffee  cold, this one has a unique splash guard feature that will allow you to drink or pour your coffee without the ice falling out with it.
The cup has a ceramic interior coating, which prevents lingering flavors and smells from past beverages. It also has a double-wall vacuum-insulated design to keep drinks hot for up to 12 hours or cold for up to 24 hours.
It’s leakproof and will fit in most cupholders. However, it’s not dishwasher-safe — it should be washed by hand.
available in multiple colors and sizes
ceramic coating to prevent lingering odors and flavors
double-wall vacuum-insulated design to keep drinks hot for up to 12 hours or cold for up to 24 hours
splash guard for iced beverages
leakproof
fits in most cupholders
not dishwasher-safe
may be too small for some — the largest size is 16 oz
has a screw-on lid, which may not be as convenient when driving or on the go
Price:  $$$
Dishwasher-safe:  no
Volume:  10 oz (296 mL) or 14 oz (414 mL)
If you find yourself regularly reheating your coffee and prefer the style of a traditional coffee mug, then the Ember mug may be worth the splurge.
This smart mug comes with a heated coaster that connects to an app on your phone, allowing you to customize your drink’s temperature and control the heat of the coaster. However, the mug is also functional without the app and will default to the last set temperature.
Depending on which size you choose, the coaster has an 80- or 90-minute battery life to keep your drink hot. It can also be plugged in and charged to keep your coffee heated longer.
For safety purposes, the auto-sleep feature turns the heat off automatically after 2 hours of inactivity, but the mug will wake back up when it senses liquid or movement.
Because it does not have a lid, the mug does not work for taking your coffee on the go. However, it’s a great option for  tech-minded individuals  looking to perfectly control the temperature of their coffee at home or at the office.
available in four colors and two sizes
allows you to control the temperature of your coffee
can be plugged in for longer heating
includes safety features
compatible with Apple and Android devices
30-day money-back guarantee
expensive
not dishwasher-safe
not suitable for taking coffee on the go
requires recharging of battery after 80 or 90 minutes
Price:  $
Dishwasher-safe:  no
Volume:  12 oz (355 mL)
If you’re on a tight budget, CIVAGO is worth considering — it offers the benefits of an insulated travel mug for less than $15.
This vacuum-insulated tumbler is designed to keep drinks hot for 3 hours or cold for 9 hours, and it has a comfortable handle.
Keep in mind that while the silicone lid is designed to minimize leaks, it does not close, so it’s not fully spill- or leakproof.
The mug is not dishwasher-safe and will need to be handwashed, but at such an affordable price, it may be worth the extra effort.
available in multiple colors
vacuum-insulated to help keep drinks hot for up to 3 hours or cold for up to 9 hours
affordable
comfortable handle
not designed to prevent leaks or spills
lid does not close
does not fit in most cupholders
not dishwasher-safe

Comparison of the best reusable coffee mugs

How to choose a travel mug
If you’ve shopped for a travel mug, then you know just how many options there are. To help narrow your search, here are some key factors to keep in mind:
Cost:  You’ll want to choose a mug that fits your budget, but also remember that you’ll be saving money by reusing this mug over time.
Leak- or spill-proof:  If you plan on tossing your mug in a bag or keeping it in a cupholder during a shaky stroller walk, look for one that is spill-proof. If you prefer to drink your coffee in the car, while camping, or from home or the office, then this feature may not be as important.
Insulation:  Consider how long you’d like your drink to maintain its temperature. Some cups are better insulated than others and can maintain temperatures longer.
Material:  Some materials are better than others at preventing lingering flavors or smells. Especially if you plan on using your mug for multiple beverage types, you’ll want to consider options like the W&P Porter Ceramic Mug and the MiiR TruEnamel Camp Cup.
Size:  The size you choose will depend on not only the  volume  you’d like for your drink but also whether you need a mug that fits in a cupholder or the side pocket of a backpack.
Dishwasher compatibility:  Many reusable mugs need to be washed by hand, but some are dishwasher-safe for easier cleaning.
Style preferences:  Travel mugs come in a variety of colors, shapes, and styles. Since you’ll be using it regularly, look for one that matches your style.
Other features:  Travel mugs vary greatly in the features they offer. For example, the Fellow Carter Move Travel Mug has a splash guard for iced drinks, and the Hydro Flask Coffee Flask with Flex Sip Lid features a flex strap for easy transport.

Frequently asked questions
Below are some of the commonly asked questions about reusable coffee mugs.
While our list includes quite a few really good travel mugs, we think the Contigo Autoseal West Loop Vacuum-Insulated Travel Mug and the Hydro Flask Coffee Flask with Flex Sip Lid are two of the best choices because of their cupholder-friendly sizes and leakproof features.
The Hydro Flask mug is also dishwasher-safe, so it’s super easy to clean.
According to the companies’ websites, the Simple Modern Insulated Tumbler Cup and the Fellow Carter Move Travel Mug will keep drinks hot for up to 12 hours or cold for up to 24 hours, though results may vary.
Many other products on this list suggest that they can keep drinks hot for 7 hours or longer.
YETI offers several products with great features and positive customer reviews. However, depending on your needs and preferences, there may be a better mug for you.
For example, while the YETI products on our list come recommended because they are dishwasher-safe and keep drinks hot or cold over a period of time, they are not leak- or spill-proof.

The bottom line
Reusable coffee mugs are a great alternative to the traditional paper cups offered at most coffee shops.
In addition to sustainability, they offer perks such as the ability to maintain your drink’s temperature for longer periods.
Be sure to consider what specific features are important to you, as well as factors like cost and the size of the cup, before deciding which product is best.

References:

https://www.healthline.com#clean
https://www.healthline.com#ceramic
https://www.healthline.com#leakproof
https://www.healthline.com#camping
https://www.healthline.com#commuting
https://www.healthline.com#handle
https://www.healthline.com#insulated
https://www.healthline.com#eco-friendly
https://www.healthline.com#straw
https://www.healthline.com#iced
https://www.healthline.com#splurge
https://www.healthline.com#affordable
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/how-to-reduce-carbon-footprint
https://www.healthline.comhttps://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33091697/
https://nam02.safelinks.protection.outlook.com/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.healthline.com%2Fabout%2Fvet-brands-and-products&data=05%7C01%7Ccstaskawicz%40redventures.com%7Ce302ffa6810e41c053d808da3f6d7512%7C4289d6102cfd46218c9644a1518ddb0a%7C0%7C0%7C637892036598491706%7CUnknown%7CTWFpbGZsb3d8eyJWIjoiMC4wLjAwMDAiLCJQIjoiV2luMzIiLCJBTiI6Ik1haWwiLCJXVCI6Mn0%3D%7C3000%7C%7C%7C&sdata=DTYMoCRnwyCPVbLqovEKEn3MnQ7xf08GqwTeQydxhlk%3D&reserved=0
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/top-10-evidence-based-health-benefits-of-green-tea
https://www.healthline.com/health/baby/best-baby-strollers
https://www.healthline.com/health/spotlight-healthy-camping-food#1
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/9-benefits-oats-oatmeal
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/top-evidence-based-health-benefits-of-coffee
https://www.un.org/en/climatechange/net-zero-coalition
https://www.climateneutral.org/
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/best-cold-brew
https://www.healthline.com/health/wellness-tech-gifts
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/how-much-coffee-should-you-drink
