Title: 8 Best Baby Food Delivery Services, According to a Dietitian


A quick look at the best baby food delivery services
Best overall:   Serenity Kids
Best organic:   White Leaf Provisions
Best for baby-led weaning:   Tiny Organics
Best frozen:   Raised Real
Best shelf-stable:   Cerebelly
Best for single-ingredient meals:   Tiny Human Food
Best for older babies:   Nurture Life
Best for exciting flavors:   Square Baby
As a busy mom myself, I know all too well how hard it can be to get meals on the table. Add a baby to the mix — who can’t yet eat what everyone else at home does — and it gets even tougher.
Fortunately, there are services available that deliver healthy baby food directly to your home, removing the stress of shopping for, or making your own, infant meals.
We used the following criteria to assemble this list of the best baby food delivery services:
Ingredients.  We looked for services that don’t add unnecessary ingredients to their baby foods, like added sugars or processed preservatives.
Nutrition.  We sought out companies that offer meals made with nutritious fruits, vegetables, proteins, and healthy fats — all of which are necessary for healthy growth and development.
Reviews.  We chose companies that have mostly positive reviews. Of course, not everyone has a great experience, but the companies on our list have high levels of customer satisfaction.
Vetting.  All the services included have been vetted to ensure that they meet Healthline’s medical and business standards.
Here are the 8 best baby food delivery services.

Healthline’s picks of the best baby food delivery services
Serenity Kids is a baby food company offering purees, puffs, and toddler formula made from high quality,  organic ingredients .
As a dietitian, I’m particularly impressed by Serenity Kids’ inclusion of quality meats, like  grass-fed beef  and bison, wild salmon, free-range chicken, and pastured turkey.
Meat is a rich source of healthy and easy-to-digest protein, fat, and nutrients for growing infants and toddlers, and Serenity Kids is one of the few baby food delivery services offering meat in its selections ( 1 ).
The products are also free of:
soy
rice
corn
nuts
sweeteners
gluten
preservatives
seed oils
artificial colors and flavors
high sugar fruits
However, Serenity Kids’ products are manufactured in facilities that also process common allergens, like milk, tree nuts, eggs, soy, fish, and wheat. So, they may not be appropriate for children with severe allergies.
While you can purchase food pouches individually, subscribing saves you 20% on each purchase — bringing a 6-pack of single-serving purees down to $2.79–$3.19 per serving, and a 6-pack of puffs (each containing 6 servings) down to $4.39 per container.
You can choose to have your subscription refilled every 2–9 weeks, and shipping is always free.
Another bonus is that the foods are all shelf-stable, so you don’t have to worry about making space in your fridge or freezer.
The puree pouches will keep for 18 months unopened, while the puffs will last for 9 months unopened.
After opening, the purees should be refrigerated and used within 24 hours. Opened puffs don’t have to be refrigerated, but they should be used within 1 week after opening.
Example flavors
Carrot Spinach & Basil
Grass Fed Bison with Organic Kabocha Squash and Spinach
Turmeric Chicken with Bone Broth
Pros
mostly organic ingredients and sustainably raised meats
free of soy, rice, corn, nuts, sweeteners, gluten, preservatives, seed oils, artificial colors, and artificial flavors
subscribers save 20%
free shipping
Cons
expensive
not appropriate for babies with severe food allergies
White Leaf Provisions offers plant-based purees and  applesauce  made with organic and non-genetically modified (non-GMO) ingredients.
What’s more, all of the ingredients are harvested from sustainable farms that use a practice known as regenerative agriculture, which focuses on soil health, crop diversity, conservation, and mimicking natural plant growth cycles ( 2 ).
The company’s baby food is manufactured in a facility that’s free of  gluten , animal products, dairy, and nuts. So, you can rest assured that the products are safe and appropriate for infants with allergies or intolerances to these foods.
White Leaf Provisions baby food can be purchased without a subscription.
However, subscribing saves you 10% on each order — bringing the cost of a 6-count box of baby food down to $2.69 per serving and a 4-count of applesauce to $1.35 per serving.
Shipping is free for orders over $40 and costs $8.95 otherwise.
While the purees and applesauce are shelf-stable, the company recommends consuming the products by the expiration date on the container.
Opened purees and applesauce should be refrigerated and consumed within 24 hours.
Example flavors
Pumpkin + Nectarine
Peach + Oat
Apple + Pear Sauce
Pros
organic, non-GMO, and sustainably farmed ingredients
manufactured in an allergy-friendly facility
Cons
more expensive than most grocery store baby food brands
limited selection of flavors
shipping costs $8.95 on orders less than $40
Tiny Organics specializes in fresh and organic meals that are ideal for  baby-led weaning (BLW) .
BLW encourages offering age-appropriate soft finger foods to infants ages 6 months and older so they can feed themselves. Potential benefits of BLW include less pickiness and more food enjoyment ( 3 ).
All of the meals offered by Tiny Organics feature bite-sized,  plant-based , and organic ingredients.
Additionally, the meals are free of most allergens, though some include coconut. They’re also manufactured in a shared facility that processes allergens, so the service isn’t suitable for infants with severe allergies.
Prices range from $4.69–$5.49 per meal, with the option to receive 12 or 24 meals every 1, 2, or 4 weeks. Shipping costs $5.99.
Tiny Organics meals arrive frozen and should be stored in the freezer until you’re ready to heat them.
When ready to prepare your baby’s meal, simply remove the lid and microwave the container in 30-second intervals. Each box also includes instructions for cooking meals on the stove and thawing them in the fridge.
All meals should be used or discarded by the expiration date on the package.
Example flavors
Valencian Paella (bell pepper, tomato, peas, and onion)
Baby Burrito Bowl (pinto beans, corn, tomato, and scallions)
Tropic Like Its Hot (coconut milk, pineapple, and kiwi)
Pros
organic and minimally processed ingredients
designed for BLW
Cons
expensive
not a good fit for severe food allergies
$5.99 shipping fee
Raised Real is ideal if you prefer to cook your infant’s meals but want the prep work done for you.
The meals arrive frozen and are composed of diced, raw ingredients that must be cooked on the stovetop or in the microwave (by adding water) prior to serving. These meals are great for BLW, but can also be easily mashed.
The meals are fully plant-based and made with organic and sustainable ingredients.
While some include  coconut , all of the meals are otherwise free of major allergens. However, Raised Real can’t guarantee that the facility the meals are assembled in is allergen-free.
Meals are also gluten-free, with breakfast bowls containing  certified gluten-free oats .
Raised Real meals cost $4.99–$5.49 per meal, and you can choose to have 12 or 24 meals delivered every 1 or 2 weeks. Shipping is free.
The meals can be stored in the freezer and should be used within 3–6 months.
Example flavors
Oats + Mango + Butternut Squash + Ginger + Coconut Butter
Peas + Mint + Broccoli + Navy Beans + Olive Oil
Raspberry + Sweet Potato + Ground Pumpkin Seeds + Cardamom + Coconut Butter
Pros
texture can be easily modified to suit baby’s stage of development
organic and gluten-free ingredients
can be quickly cooked in the microwave or on the stovetop
Cons
slightly more prep work required
expensive
not appropriate for severe food allergies
Cerebelly was founded by a neurosurgeon with the goal of providing  brain-healthy foods  for kids and babies, including plant-based purees, bars, and smoothies.
The company’s unique subscription service allows you to enter information about your child’s age and developmental milestones and receive personalized recommendations to help optimize their neurological development.
Cerebelly’s foods are gluten-free, free from major allergens, and made with all organic ingredients.
They also contain an organic nutrient blend made of nutrients derived from whole foods, like spinach, kelp, and  sunflower seeds .
Cerebelly’s purees and smoothies cost $2.17–$2.89 per pack, depending on the size of the box you purchase.
The service offers five box sizes, with the mini box being the most expensive.
Here are the current options:
Mini box:  7–13 items, starting at $2.89 per item
Small box:  14–27 items, starting at $2.60 per item
Medium box:  28–41 items, starting at $2.46 per item
Large box:  42–55 items, starting at $2.31 per item
Family box:  56+ items, starting at $2.17 per item
Shipping is free for all orders, except for the smallest box, which includes a $4.99 shipping fee.
Cerebelly items are shelf-stable and can be stored at room temperature.
They should be used by the expiration date on the package, and, after opening, they’re good for 48 hours when stored in the refrigerator.
Example flavors
Broccoli Pear
Carrot Chickpea
Purple Carrot Blueberry
Pros
organic meals fortified with extra food-based nutrients
designed to support healthy brain development
convenient shelf-stable packaging
allergen and gluten-free
Cons
expensive
Tiny Human Food offers simple,  classic baby food recipes  made from high quality and organic ingredients.
What’s more, the company also uses cold-press processing for its purees to ensure that they remain as fresh as possible.
The meals contain relatively short ingredient lists and are free of major allergens and gluten.
However, as Tiny Human Foods’ website doesn’t state whether the manufacturing facility processes allergen-containing foods, it’s unclear if there’s a potential for  cross-contamination .
Tiny Human Food offers a recurring subscription of 36 servings every 2 or 4 weeks for $100, or about $2.77 per serving.
Shipping is always free.
Tiny Human Food meals are delivered fresh and can be stored in the fridge or freezer.
Unopened packages should be consumed by the printed expiration date, while any leftovers should be stored in the fridge and used within 24–48 hours after opening.
Example flavors
Pumpkin + Banana
Green Beans
Sweet Potatoes
Pros
organic meals
simple, single or double-ingredient recipes
delivered fresh but can be frozen
Cons
possible cross-contamination risk for allergens and gluten
more expensive than store-bought, single-ingredient baby foods
limited selection of flavors
Nurture Life creates meals and  snacks that are kid-friendly  and healthy.
Although the brand is best-known for its Kids Meals, it also offers a Finger Foods line for babies ages 10 months and up.
These foods are a great size for babies to feed themselves, while also being small and soft enough to prevent choking. Plus, they can be mashed for younger infants as well.
Nurture Life Finger Foods include  sustainably sourced meats , organic veggies, and organic grains.
Additionally, the company’s baby-friendly snack bites are made with whole ingredients, like oats, sunflower butter, and dried fruits.
Nurture Life meals are completely free of peanuts and tree nuts. However, some may contain other common allergens, like wheat, milk, soy, or fish.
The meals also aren’t appropriate for infants who need a gluten-free diet.
Nurture Life Finger Foods cost $6.89 each, with a minimum order of 6 meals, plus $8 shipping.
Shipping is free for larger orders of 9, 12, or 15 meals.
There are also discounts available for larger boxes, including $10 off 12-meal boxes and $15 off 15-meal boxes.
Nurture Life meals are delivered fresh and can be served straight from the fridge or reheated in a heat-safe container.
They should be used, or frozen, by the use-by date on the package.
Example flavors
Shepherd’s Pie with Rainbow Veggie Medley
Egg Bites with Sausage and Sweet Potatoes
Salmon Cakes with Peas and Potatoes
Pros
sustainably sourced meats along with organic veggies and grains
ideal for BLW or older infants who are self-feeding
appropriate for nut or peanut allergies
can be served cold
Cons
may contain gluten and some major allergens
expensive
meals can’t be heated in their original packaging
Square Baby is a subscription service that grows with your baby as the meals are crafted to provide optimal amounts of protein, veggies, grains, and other nutrients based on your child’s age.
While you can opt for meal plans designed by registered dietitians and pediatricians, the service also allows you to pick and choose your kiddo’s meals yourself.
The company also offers both plant-based and animal-containing purees and mashes, all of which come in exciting flavor combinations, such as Apple Rosemary Lentils and Mango Coconut Chicken.
Regardless of which items you choose, all of the ingredients are organic and non-GMO.
Square Baby also offers Allergen Introduction meals, which contain common allergens like fish, shellfish, peanuts, and dairy. Research suggests that  early exposure to common allergens  may help prevent food allergies ( 1 ).
Square Baby range from $4.98–$5.64 per serving, with the option to receive 14, 28, 42, or 56 meals every 2 weeks.
Shipping is free, though the service is currently only available in a few states, including Arizona, California, Colorado, Idaho, Nevada, Oregon, Utah, and Washington.
Square Baby meals are delivered frozen and should be consumed within 2 days of thawing.
According to the company’s website, meals kept in the freezer can last up to 2 months past their best-by date.
Example flavors
Peanut Pumpkin Pie
Coconut Shrimp Fried Rice
Apple Rosemary Lentils
Pros
organic and non-GMO ingredients, including meats
some meals designed for allergen introduction
subscription that can grow with your baby
Cons
only available in select western states
expensive

Baby food delivery comparison
Here’s a quick look at how our top picks compare:

How to choose the best food delivery service for your baby
When shopping for the right baby food delivery service for your family, here are some factors to consider:
Budget.  As many baby food delivery services use premium ingredients, they command a premium price. However, there are more affordable options to consider, such as setting up a Subscribe & Save of your  preferred baby food  on Amazon. Depending on the brand you choose, this can significantly reduce the price and maintain the convenience.
Ingredient quality.  All of the services listed above use organic ingredients or sustainably sourced meat, which contribute to their higher price points.
Types of foods.  While most baby food companies offer products containing fruits, vegetables, and grains, it can be harder to find ones that also include meats. If you want your baby to have  meat , then consider Serenity Kids, Nurture Life, or Square Baby.
Ease of preparation.  Consider how much time you want to spend prepping your baby’s meals. While some services offer ready-to-serve options, others, like Raised Real, require heating in the microwave or over the stove.
Storage.  If you want your baby’s food to be as fresh as possible, go with the services that deliver fresh meals, like Nurture Life or Tiny Human Food. However, shelf-stable and frozen options offer the added bonus of flexibility. Shelf-stable meals, in particular, are great for travel or busy days.
Texture.  Whether you choose purees or finger foods will depend on how old your baby is and if you’re using BLW. However, if you want to stick with one service for the duration of your baby’s introduction to solids, know that you can easily mash or blend finger food meals to accommodate your child’s current developmental stage.
Cross-contamination.  If your baby has allergies, it’s important to choose a service that offers allergen-free meals produced in an allergen-free facility, such as White Leaf Provisions. On the other hand, if you’re interested in introducing your little one to common allergens, it’s worth talking to your pediatrician about Square Baby’s Allergen Introduction meals.

The bottom line
Baby food delivery companies make feeding your baby convenient and easy.
There are several great services available, all of which offer high quality purees, mashes, or finger foods for your little one.
While they’re all quite expensive, some offer discounts to subscribers or for larger orders.
Overall, the services listed above may be a good fit for your family if food quality is a major priority for you, and if you value the convenience of quick, ready-made infant meals.
Try this today:  If these delivery services are a bit out of your budget, it’s also easy to make your own baby food. All you need is a high powered blender or  immersion blender .
I make fresh baby food for my 8-month-old regularly using the foods we normally eat as a family. Some of her favorite combinations include beef roast with butternut squash and chicken with cauliflower.
To make baby food, blend the ingredients — like meat, veggies, fruits, herbs, and whole grains — until they reach the right consistency for your baby’s age and eating abilities. If needed, you can thin out homemade baby food with water, breastmilk, or prepared formula.
I then divvy the food into ice trays and freeze it so it lasts longer. When it’s time to eat, I simply pop a few cubes in the microwave for about 1 minute.
Just remember to always follow safe food handling practices when preparing and storing your baby’s meals.


References:

https://www.healthline.com#overall
https://www.healthline.com#organic
https://www.healthline.com#baby-led-weaning
https://www.healthline.com#frozen
https://www.healthline.com#shelf-stable
https://www.healthline.com#single-ingredient-meals
https://www.healthline.com#older-babies
https://www.healthline.com#exciting-flavors
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/what-is-organic-food
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/grass-fed-vs-grain-fed-beef
https://www.healthline.comhttps://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28027215/
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/the-most-unhealthy-fruits
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/is-applesauce-good-for-you
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8398875/
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/what-is-gluten
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/weaning
https://www.healthline.comhttps://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34281101/
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/plant-based-diet-vs-vegan
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/is-a-coconut-a-fruit
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/gluten-in-oats
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/brain-food-for-kids
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/sunflower-seeds
https://www.healthline.com/health/childrens-health/homemade-baby-food-recipes
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/what-is-cross-contamination
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/healthy-snacks-for-kids
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/eco-friendly-meat-eating
https://www.healthline.com/health/baby/baby-allergic-reaction-to-food
https://www.healthline.comhttps://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28027215/
https://www.healthline.com/health/parenting/best-baby-food
https://www.healthline.com/health/baby/meat-baby
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/best-kitchen-tools
