Title: MYX II Review: What Is It and How Does It Work?

The MYX II is a smart indoor cycling bike that is promoted as a convenient and cost-effective alternative to the gym.
The company recently released an upgraded model of the original bike, which offers several improved features, including access to live classes through a subscription to BODi. This platform provides an extensive selection of live and on-demand classes, making it easy to ramp up your workout routine, regardless of your fitness level.
This article reviews the MYX II bike and discusses what it is, how it works, and whether you should give it a try.
built-in 360-degree rotating touch screen
bottle holders in the bars rather than behind the seat
lower up-front investment than for rival Peloton Bike (when it’s not on sale) and lower monthly subscription cost
two fitness app subscription options, featuring live and on-demand classes
heart rate-based training options
compatible with running shoes or SPD cleats
uses friction resistance, which can be a bit louder than Peloton’s electromagnetic resistance and may not feel as smooth to adjust
reports of occasional app glitches
monthly subscription fee required to access full functionality

What is MYX Fitness?
MYX Fitness is a home workout company designed to promote better health and help you reach your fitness goals.
The company offers two packages — the MYX II and MYX II Plus, both of which include a Star Trac  stationary bike  equipped with an interactive touch-screen monitor.
However, the MYX II Plus also comes with additional accessories, including free weights and an exercise mat.
The MYX II bike is fully adjustable, and the screen rotates 360 degrees, making it easy to take your workout to the floor or mat.
In addition to displaying performance metrics, including your speed, cadence, and distance, the screen allows you to stream workout classes and track your progress over time.
The MYX II connects to the Beachbody on Demand Interactive (BODi), which provides access to a variety of live and on-demand workouts, including cycling, yoga, barre, Pilates, and  meditation .

Who is the MYX II Bike for?
The MYX II bike is for anyone who is comfortable using a stationary bike and wants to do cycling workouts and fitness classes in their home. The bike is suitable for beginner to advanced cyclists.
However, remember that access to live and on-demand workouts, personal training, and fitness tracking requires a monthly subscription fee.

How does the MYX II compare with the original model?
The MYX II is the updated version of the original MYX bike. The bike itself is the same, but it features a few key upgrades.
For example, the new model is equipped with an improved sensor and comes with a heart rate monitor that tracks your heart rate along with your speed, cadence, and distance. According to MYX Fitness, the new sensor is 10% more accurate than the previous model.
Additionally, the tablet can now pair with your Apple Watch, which you can use as a heart rate monitor.
The MYX II comes with an 8-megapixel camera that lets you join live community classes and view trainers on a split screen.
What’s more, the bike boasts an improved 20-watt, Bluetooth-enabled speaker for an enhanced sound experience.
Now that the MYX II connects to the BODi membership, live classes are available, which is a highlight for many users.

Bike specs
The bike can accommodate riders from 4 feet 11 inches (150 cm) to 6 feet 8 inches (203 cm) tall and weighing up to 350 pounds (159 kg).
In terms of floor space, the company recommends a 4-foot (122-cm) by 6-foot (183-cm) area so you can move around, though the bike’s actual footprint is much smaller, at 19 inches (48 cm) wide and 38 inches (96.5 cm) long.
The bike itself stands 47 inches (119 cm) high and is 21 inches (53 cm) wide by 54 inches (137 cm) long, and it weighs 134 pounds (61 kg).
The seat and handlebars adjust to accommodate different riders, and the pedals can work with athletic shoes or SPD clip-in bike shoes.

Display and interface
The high definition touch screen measures 21.5 inches (54.5 cm) and swivels for workouts off the bike.
The interface allows for a range of options, including pausing workouts if you need to and adjusting the volume of the music and the trainer separately.



Design and assembly
The company describes the bike’s construction as rustproof and hypoallergenic.
After you order a bike, it should arrive within weeks, not months. And you won’t be left to haul it upstairs yourself — a delivery partner will help set it up on the included mat.
The bike has two small wheels on its base, so moving it is straightforward, and the feet are adjustable for leveling.
Another handy design feature is that the water bottle holder is in front of you on the handlebars, not mounted behind the seat.

How does the MYX II bike work?
A monthly membership to BODi is required to access the full functionality of the bike, and includes unlimited access to hundreds of fitness classes, with new workouts added every week.
You’ll still have access to MYX heart rate-based workouts, which connect to a  heart rate monitor  and track your progress. These routines integrate heart rate zone training, which uses your metrics to monitor the intensity of your workout, provide personalized heart rate zone targets, and determine your fitness level.
A BODi subscription costs $19.95 per month in addition to the yearly Beachbody on Demand (BOD) membership, which costs $119.88 and includes a free 30-day subscription to BODi.
While you’re on a ride or doing another workout, a dashboard will display your performance metrics, including your time, distance, speed, cadence, and calories burned.
You’ll also see your heart rate, which MYX Fitness recommends using to gauge how hard to push yourself or when to dial back your effort. The bike comes with a Polar OH1 heart rate monitor and can pair with an Apple Watch.
Additionally, thanks to the bike’s new camera, you can receive live trainer feedback during classes.
While the coaches will encourage you to maintain good form, particularly when you might feel tempted to start slumping, they generally won’t pester you with too many directions to crank up the resistance. Rather, they’ll often suggest or invite it in an encouraging way.

Classes
The MYX II includes all the former MYX classes from previous trainers and heart rate-based workouts as well as new live classes.
These classes emphasize heart rate, and they range from easy cruises to  strenuous  rides that will leave you drenched in sweat. You can select from endurance, rhythm, warmup, and recovery rides, among others.
Some of the types of classes available through BODi are:
endurance rides
cardio
barre
Pilates
kickboxing
boot camp
bodyweight  high intensity interval training  (HIIT)
weightlifting
strength training
yoga
meditation
For floor workouts, the MYX II’s screen swivels, making it easier to follow along with the instructor. While there are plenty of bodyweight workouts to choose from, some classes require additional equipment, such as  resistance bands  or dumbbells.
Finally, the new camera feature allows users to do live workouts, providing a community connection and the chance to compete.

How much does the MYX II bike cost?
The MYX II is available in two packages: the MYX II and the MYX II Plus.
The MYX II costs $1,399 and includes an exercise bike, touch-screen tablet, and heart rate monitor.
The MYX II Plus includes all these features, as well as a stabilizing mat, 6-piece weight set,  kettlebell , exercise mat, foam roller, and resistance band, for $1,599.
Delivery and assembly are free, and financing is available for qualified customers.
MYX also offers a 30-day return policy. The bike parts are covered under a 1-year warranty, and the frame is covered under a 5-year warranty.
Keep in mind that the BODi memberships is not included with either package.
BODi costs $19.95 per month plus $119.88 for the yearly Beachbody on Demand (BOD) membership (which includes a free month of BODi).

Benefits of the MYX II bike
The MYX II bike is more affordable than similar products and offers a wide variety of classes that go beyond  cycling , especially with the new app upgrades. The bike now offers live classes, which are an especially popular feature among competitor brands like  Peloton and Echelon .
The wide variety of workouts can be especially convenient for those who enjoy trying new things and experimenting with new workouts each day.
Live classes are ideal for extroverts who enjoy connecting to a group, which may help provide encouragement, motivation, and accountability. Plus, there are plenty of on-demand classes available.
Classes are also available in a range of difficulty levels, making it a good option for  beginners  and experienced athletes alike.
Unlike other exercise bikes, the MYX II bike can be used with regular shoes and does not require you to purchase special cycling shoes, which often cost more than $100.
Additionally, the MYX II can be a great way to add more physical activity to your routine.
According to one review of 13 studies, indoor cycling may help improve body composition and support healthy blood pressure and cholesterol levels ( 1 ).
Other research shows that regular physical activity can help prevent a variety of chronic health conditions, including heart disease, type 2 diabetes, and degenerative brain conditions like Alzheimer’s disease ( 2 ,  3 ).

Potential downsides
Although the MYX II bike has some pretty impressive benefits, there are a few downsides to consider.
The bike connects to Apple Health but doesn’t integrate with other popular fitness apps, such as Strava, Fitbit, and Zwift.
The monthly membership fee may also be an important factor for some. You’ll need to budget for the monthly membership cost in addition to the price of the bike and exercise equipment.
While you can use the bike without the monthly membership by adjusting the resistance manually, most of the functions and features offered by the MYX II require access to an app, which costs $19.95 per month.
Finally, because it uses friction resistance, it may be noisier and not quite as smooth as magnetic-resistance bikes like those from Peloton.

How does MYX II bike compare?
The MYX II bike is solidly constructed, offering plenty of value for the price. Now that the bike includes more options for live classes and workout metrics, it holds its own against similar bikes.
Here’s a quick look at how it stacks up against the Echelon EX-5S and the original Peloton Bike:
The MYX II, Peloton Bike, and  Echelon EX-5S  are all high quality bikes equipped with 21.5-inch (54.5-cm) touch screens, built-in speakers, and Bluetooth capabilities.
However, the MYX II’s display rotates, making it more convenient for off-bike workouts.
Another benefit of the MYX II over the other two is its low cost, including the price of the bike itself and the monthly subscription fees.
That said, the Peloton app is known for its high energy classes and quality music selection. Plus, the Peloton Bike is only about $100 more expensive than the MYX II, so it’s worth considering if you prefer the experience of Peloton’s workouts.
Finally, if you’re willing to use your own tablet rather than a built-in screen, there are plenty of more affordable  indoor cycling bikes  to consider, such as the  Schwinn IC3 .

Is the MYX II bike worth it?
The MYX II bike can be a convenient and cost-effective alternative to other exercise bikes. The bike itself is durable and well constructed. The value is even higher with the addition of live classes and real-time trainer feedback.
In addition to cycling classes, the BODi membership offers an array of other cross-training options, which can be beneficial for those who prefer to add some variety to their workout routine.
Overall, because it offers many of the same features and class options, the MYX II is worth considering as an  alternative to pricier brands  like Peloton.

Customer reviews and brand reputation
There are no customer reviews on the MYX website, which is a drawback for some potential customers.
MYX Fitness has a 3.1  Trustpilot rating  based on three reviews. One positive review reports product and customer service satisfaction. The unfavorable reviews say the bike stopped working after a few months, the technology is glitchy, and the customer service is poor.
MYX Fitness is accredited by the Better Business Bureau (BBB) and has an  A+ rating . The company has a  1.2 customer review rating  based on 20 reviews. Negative reviews report issues with the tablet and streaming services and poor customer and delivery service.
On the BBB site, there are more than 100  complaints filed against MYX Fitness . At the time of writing, they had all been resolved.
There are several in-depth  reviews  from people who have tried the MYX II bike. Many users say the bike is solidly built, are happy with the interactive classes, and appreciate the option to adjust the trainer volume and music volume separately.
Unfavorable comments say the seat is uncomfortable and the friction resistance isn’t as quiet and smooth as magnetic resistance.

Shipping and warranty
MYX Fitness offers free delivery and assembly within the 48 contiguous United States.
After purchase, MYX ships your bike to a warehouse near your home. Once it’s there, you can set up a delivery time. Two delivery professionals will fully assemble the bike and place it in your chosen area.
MYX provides a 30-day return policy and a 12-month manufacturer’s warranty covering the bike parts. The frame has a 5-year warranty.

Frequently asked questions
The MYX II is the latest model of the MYX bike. The MYX II has additional features, including an upgraded sensor and heart rate monitor to track metrics such as heart rate, speed, cadence, and distance.
The MYX II is also equipped with an 8-megapixel camera and a 20-watt, Bluetooth-enabled speaker. You can pair your Apple Watch with the tablet to use it as a heart rate monitor.
You cannot use the Peloton app on a MYX bike. MYX tablets work only with the BODi membership, which requires a monthly subscription.
MYX offers prerecorded scenic rides that you can do at your own pace. Scenic rides are 20–60 minutes long and are not trainer-led.

The bottom line
MYX II is a smart exercise bike that makes it easy to enjoy a variety of  indoor cycling  and workout classes from home.
What’s more, with two fitness apps to choose from and access to live interactive classes, the upgraded MYX II model offers even more value than its predecessor.
At the end of the day, if you’re in the market for a home exercise bike, the MYX II should definitely be high on your list.

References:

https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/best-exercise-bike-for-home
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/12-benefits-of-meditation
https://www.healthline.com/health/fitness/heart-rate-monitor
https://www.healthline.com/health/strenuous-exercise
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/benefits-of-hiit
https://www.healthline.com/health/fitness/back-exercises-with-bands
https://www.healthline.com/health/fitness/best-kettlebells
https://www.healthline.com/health/fitness-exercise/cycling-benefits
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/peloton-vs-echelon
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/how-to-start-exercising
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6722762/
https://www.healthline.comhttps://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28708630/
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5934999/
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/best-exercise-bike-for-home
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/best-exercise-bike-for-home
https://www.healthline.com/health/fitness/schwinn-ic3
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/peloton-bike-alternatives
https://www.trustpilot.com/review/www.myxfitness.com
https://www.bbb.org/us/ca/santa-monica/profile/exercise-and-wellness/myx-fitness-llc-1216-1529972/complaints
https://www.bbb.org/us/ca/santa-monica/profile/exercise-and-wellness/myx-fitness-llc-1216-1529972/customer-reviews
https://www.bbb.org/us/ca/santa-monica/profile/exercise-and-wellness/myx-fitness-llc-1216-1529972/complaints
https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/peloton-bike-alternatives
https://www.healthline.com/health/benefits-of-a-spin-class
